                   
                   Triple-Talk PCI Users Manual



Access Solutions
4536 Edison Ave.
Sacramento, Ca. 95821
Web: www.axsol.com
Customer Support: (916) 481-3559




                        Table of Contents

     Section 1.0 - Introduction
     Section 1.1 - System Requirements
     Section 1.2 - Installation
     Section 1.3 - Installation Problems 
     Section 1.4 - Screen Access Driver Support
     Section 1.5 - Special Notes
     Section 1.6 - Trouble Shooting
     Section 1.7 - Advanced Features
     Section 1.8 - Specifications
  

Section 1.0

                           INTRODUCTION

     The Triple-Talk PCI is a text to speech synthesizer that
runs on a standard 33MHz PCI bus.  Utilizing todays modern
technology, the Triple-Talk PCI is extremely responsive and
delivers a quality of speech that is better than ever.  Unlike
most synthesizers, the Triple-Talk PCI takes full advantage of
the high speed transfer rates of the PCI bus.  In simple terms,
start and stop speech commands to the synthesizer appear to be
instantaneous.

     The Triple-Talk PCI has 8 predefined voices, 10 volume
levels, 10 different speeds, 100 unique pitches, and is fully
configurable to meet your listening needs.  In addition,
parameters such as tone, punctuation filtering, and intonation
are also adjustable.  It is important to note that these settings
may be limited by certain software packages such as screen access
programs.

     With support for Windows 3.x/95/98/ME/2k/XP and DOS, the Triple-Talk
PCI is easy to install and ready to start speaking.  All the
software necessary for installation and supporting many of
todays' most popular screen readers is included.  The following
screen reader programs are currently supported:

     1. Window-Eyes 3.x and later.
     2. Jaws for Windows 3.x and later.
     3. ASAW
      4. Vocal-Eyes 3.0 
     5. ASAP 2.03
     6. OpenBook 3.5
     7. Ruby 4.x and later.



Section 1.1

                       System Requirements
          
     The Triple-Talk PCI is designed to operate in an IBM or
compatible computer with a 33MHz PCI bus.  Most pentium based
systems as well as some of the later 486 based systems are
equipped with a 33MHz PCI bus.  If you are not sure if your
computer is equipped with a 33MHz PCI bus, we recommend
contacting your computer vendor or refer to your computers' user
manual.       
     
     Currently the Triple-Talk PCI functions with Windows 3.x,
Windows 9x/ME (including Dos Boxes and straight Dos mode), and  
Windows 2000/XP.

       
Section 1.2

                           Installation

     To install the Triple-Talk PCI, follow the two procedures
listed below:


  Hardware Procedure:

     It is strongly recommended that a qualified technician
performs the hardware and software installation needed to get
your new Triple-Talk PCI up and running.  Access Solutions does
not warrant products that are damaged due to improper handling or
improper installation. 


     1. Turn your computer off and unplug the power cord to the     computer.  
        You may wish to remove other cords to make       accessing the 
        internals of the computer easier.  If you     do this, make sure you pay 
        close attention to where cords are connected.    

     2. Remove the outer shell of your computer case to expose      the 
        inner circuitry.  This usually requires the removal     of a few 
        screws from the back of the computer.
   
     3. Locate a free PCI slot where you wish to install the        
        Triple-Talk PCI card.  You will notice several other cards      placed 
        perpendicular to a main circuit board.  This main
circuit board called a "mother board" contains slots that cards, like the 
        Triple-Talk PCI,      may be plugged into.  PCI slots are shorter in 
        length       than ISA slots and should not be confused.              

     4. Place the Triple-Talk PCI card in the free slot you found
        in step 3.  The metal bracket that is attached to one       side of 
        the card should go towards the back of the computer.  This metal 
        bracket on the Triple-Talk PCI card should     also be flush against 
        the back of the case.  If you find a       metal cover in the area 
        where the bracket on the Triple-Talk PCI card should go, go ahead 
        and remove it.  This         usually requires the removal of a screw.  
        Make sure the Triple-Talk PCI card is seated well in the slot in the      
        mother board.  Finally, attach a mounting screw to         the top 
        side of the Triple-Talk PCI mounting bracket.

     5. Place the outer shell of your computer case on to the      computer  
        and attach all necessary screws.

     6. Attach the included speaker by placing the eighth inch      male plug 
        into the new eighth inch female hole found on     the back of the 
        computer.

     7. Attach all cords removed in step 1.

     8. Follow the steps for installing the device drivers for      the 
        Triple-Talk PCI as described in the next section.

            
  Software Procedure:

     If you plan to use the Triple-Talk PCI with windows 95, view
     the readme.txt file in the "win95" folder located on the
     Triple-Talk PCI installation disk.
     
     If you plan to use the Triple-Talk PCI with Windows 3.x,
skip to section 1.4.  To install support drivers for Windows 98/Me/2k/XP,
follow the steps listed below.

     1. Turn your computer on.

     2. When the Add New Hardware Wizard comes up informing you 
        that a PCI MultiMedia or Communication device has been detected,     
        insert the Triple-Talk PCI installation disk into your floppy drive and 
        press Enter.

     3. When prompted for whether or not windows should search for
        the best driver for this device, select the radio button that
        allows windows to search for the best driver for this device and press 
        Enter.
          
     4. Next, check the check box labeled "Specify a Location". 

     5. In the edit box, type "a:\" and press Enter. 
    
     6. The add new hardware wizard will inform you that the      
       Access Solutions Triple-Talk PCI has been found. Just press Enter.

     7. Once you have reached this point, the add new hardware
        wizard should inform you that it has successfully installed all the 
        necessary files needed for supporting your new Triple-Talk PCI. 
        Just press Enter and you are all done.
          
     8. Remove the Triple-Talk PCI installation disk from your floppy drive. 


     If you plan to run a Dos screen reader, such as Vocal-Eyes, while  
in a Dos Box under windows 98/ME, do the following:     

     1. Insert the Triple-Talk PCI installation disk into your 
        floppy drive

     2. Click on the "Start" button to bring up the start menu.

     3. Type 'R' to bring up a windows run line.

     4. Type "a:\msdos\pci-dos.exe" and press Enter. 
     
5. Follow the on screen prompts to install Dos support for your  
   new Triple-Talk PCI.



Section 1.3    

                             Installation Problems

        The Triple-Talk PCI is a fully compliant PCI Plug and Play
card that supports IRQ sharing.  If you have trouble getting  
the Triple-Talk PCI to install under Windows 9x or find that the  
synthesizer conflicts with other add in cards, try the following:
        
        1. Check to see if the Triple-Talk PCI appears under the 
           "System" tab in "Device Manager".  If it does, the
           Triple-Talk PCI may be conflicting with another card.

        2. Try moving the Triple-Talk PCI card to another PCI slot.

        3. If the Triple-Talk PCI conflicts with another add in card,  
           try removing the add in card and see if the problem goes away.   
           If the conflict is resolved, re-install the add in card.

        4. Review the technical notes file "technts.txt" located on
           the Triple-Talk PCI installation disk.



Section 1.4
 
                   Screen Access Driver Support
   
    Windows 9x/ME/2k/XP Users -

    If you have already installed all the necessary files needed for
    supporting your Triple-Talk PCI device under windows, you are ready  
    to configure your favorite windows screen reader to operate with your new 
    Triple-Talk PCI.

    If you are using Window-Eyes or Jaws versions 4.x or later, just
    choose the Triple-Talk PCI from the synthesizer selection menu within
    your screen access program and you are ready to start reading.

    For Window-Eyes 3.1 driver support, read the "readme.txt" file
    located in the "Wineyes" folder on your Triple-Talk PCI installation
    disk.
    
    For earlier versions of Jaws, read the "readme.txt" file
    located in the "Jaws3x" folder on your Triple-Talk PCI installation
    disk.

    If you are using an OCR package such as OpenBook Unbound or
    Ruby, you may select the Triple-Talk PCI driver from the applications' 
    synthesizer selection menu. If your OCR applications' synthesizer 
    selection menu does not have an entry for the Triple-Talk PCI, see
    the "readme.txt" file located in the "ssil" folder on your 
    Triple-Talk PCI installation disk. 
    
    If your windows screen reader is not mentioned above or you are 
    a windows 3.x user, contact
    Access Solutions technical support team for further assistance.
    Information for contacting Access Solutions is located at the beginning 
    of this users manual.


    Dos Boxes and Streight Dos -

    In order to run dos screen readers or software applications that   
    require a 16 bit driver, such as Vocal-Eyes, you must first
    load the ttalkdos.com file located in your windows directory. 
    This can be done via a batch file that loads ttalkdos.com and 
    then your application software. A sample batch file
    demonstrating how to load the ttalkdos.com file and Vocal-Eyes
    is located in the "Vocal" folder on your Triple-Talk PCI
    installation disk. The name of this batch file is "talk.bat" and
    is a good example of how your batch file should look.

    If you plan to run Vocal-Eyes 3.0, read the "readme.txt" file
    located in the "vocal" folder on the Triple-Talk PCI installation disk.



Section 1.5

                                 Special Notes

        The Triple-Talk PCI has a three pin jumper block located
in the lower left hand corner of the circuit board and near the mounting 
bracket.  From the factory, a small jumper is placed over the
two pins closest to the mounting bracket.  In this position, the  
audio amplifier of the synthesizer is forced on and will remain in this
state until the computer is turned off.  If the jumper is placed
over the two pins furthest from the mounting bracket, the audio 
amplifier is turned on only when words or characters are spoken.

        If you are experiencing an annoying whine or chatter coming 
from the speaker when words or characters are not being spoken, it is 
recommended that you place the jumper over the two pins furthest from the
mounting bracket.  Otherwize, leave the jumper placed over the two  
pins closest to the mounting bracket.



Section 1.6

                         Trouble Shooting

     If you are having trouble getting your Triple-Talk PCI to
install or work properly, here are a few suggestions that may
help.

     1. First review sections 1.1 through 1.3 of this user manual. 

     2. Make sure the speaker is plugged into the Triple-Talk PCI
        eighth inch female jack and not into an 
        eighth inch         female hole on another card such as a sound card.

     3. Make sure the volume knob on the speaker is turned about         
        half way up.

     4. If you are using a screen access software package, make sure
        volume levels are not set to low.

     5. Make sure the Triple-Talk PCI is seated firmly in a PCI     slot 
        on your mother board.

     6. Make sure the Triple-Talk PCI is plugged into a PCI       slot 
        and not into an ISA slot.

     7. Review the "technts.txt" file on the installation disk.

     If you are still having trouble and have followed the steps
shown above, it is recommended that you contact Access Solutions
technical support team for further assistance.  Refer to the
beginning of this user manual for contact information.            


           
Section 1.7

                        Advanced Features

     If you are a software developer or a computer nerd, you are
in luck!  Access Solutions offers a free developer kit that
contains all the tools needed for writing software to talk to the
Triple-Talk PCI.  We do not include this information in this user
manual because it is far to boring and beyond the imagination of
the average user.  If you are interested in obtaining the
developer kit, feel free to contact Access Solutions' technical
support team for more information.



Section 1.8

                          Specifications

General Specs:
Max Audio Out .5W @ 8ohms
Fch ~ 3kc
Fcl ~ 8kc
Max Pwr consumption ~ 0.625W
         
Speech Engine:
Clk ~ 7.3728Mhz
2k Byte Input Buffer
Rxd, Txd @ 19.2kbps
