





                                  Table of Contents

          About This Manual  1
          Introduction  3
          Chapter 1 - Getting Started  4
          1.1 THE FIRST TIME OUT  5
          1.1.1 The Concept of Files  6
          1.1.2 How to Use The Commands  6
          1.1.3 The Concept of Menus  7
          1.2 MAKING THE BRAILLE 'n SPEAK TALK THE Way YOU WANT  8
          1.2.1 Volume, Rate of Speech, Pitch, and Tone  8
          1.2.2 Announcement of Punctuation and Numbers  9
          Chapter 2 - Working with Your Files  10
          2.1 READING IN YOUR FILES  11
          2.1.1 The Cursor  11
          2.1.2 Navigating through a File  11
          2.1.3 Reading Blocks of Text  12
          2.1.4 Some Tips on Reading  15
          2.2 SEARCHING FOR TEXT IN A FILE  16
          2.2.1 The Location of the Cursor  16
          2.2.2 Finding Text  17
          2.2.3 Case Sensitive Searches for Text  18
          2.3 WRITING IN YOUR FILES  20
          2.3.1 The Files Menu  20
          2.3.2 Creating a File  21
          2.3.3 Room Left in Your File  22
          2.3.4 Getting Help  22
          2.3.5 Writing Text in Your File  23
          2.3.6 Writing Control Characters into a File  23
          2.3.7 Selecting your Writing Mode  26
          2.4 EDITING TEXT   27
          2.4.1 Overwriting a Character  27
          2.4.2 Backspacing and Rubbing Out a Character  28
          2.4.3 Deleting Text  28
          2.4.4 Inserting Text  31
          2.4.5 Copying Text into Your File  32
          2.4.6 Deleting Marked Text from a File  34
          2.5 MANIPULATING FILES  34
          2.5.1 Getting a List of Existing Files  35
          2.5.2 Navigating Through Your Files  36/
          2.5.3 Opening an Existing File  38
          2.5.4 Opening an Existing File by Its Number  39
          2.5.5 Renaming a File  41
          2.5.6 Write-Protecting and Unprotecting a File  41
          2.5.7 Deleting a File  42
          2.5.8 Changing the Size of a File  43
          2.5.9 Free Space in the Braille 'n Speak  46
          2.6 SUMMARY  46
          Chapter 3 - Working With Other Tools  47
          3.1 THE CLOCK AND THE CALENDAR  47
          3.1.1 The Clock  47
          ** 3.1.2 The Calendar  49
          3.1.2.1 Checking Today's Date  49
          3.1.2.2 Setting Today's Date  49







          ** 3.1.2.3 Getting a Date from the Calendar  50
          3.1.2.4 Inserting a Date into Your Calendar  51
          ** 3.1.2.5 Calendar Alert  52
          ** 3.1.3 Information About Your Files  54
          3.2 THE STOPWATCH AND THE TIMER  56
          3.2.1 The Stopwatch  56
          3.2.1.1 Starting and Stopping the Stopwatch  56
          3.2.1.2 Reading Elapsed Time  57
          3.2.1.3 Stopping and Resetting the Stopwatch  57
          3.2.2 The Timer  58
          3.2.2.1 Finding out Time Remaining  58
          3.2.2.2 Timing In the Background  58
          3.3 THE CALCULATOR  60
          3.3.1 Basic Operations  60
          3.3.2 Setting Precision  61
          3.3.3 Inserting Calculation Results into a File  62
          3.3.4 Performing Percentage Calculations  62
          3.3.5 Storing and Using the Six Memory Locations  63
          3.3.6 Extracting a Square Root  64
          3.3.7 Error Messages and Tips  64
          ** 3.4 WORD EXCEPTIONS  64
          3.5 MACROS  66
          3.5.1 What's a Macro, Anyway?  66
          3.5.2 Recording a Macro  67
          3.5.3 Executing an Existing Macro  69
          3.5.4 How to Check a Macro  70
          3.5.5 Pausing a Macro  70
          3.5.6 Write-Protecting Macros  72
          3.6 THE ONE-HANDED BRAILLE 'N SPEAK  73
          3.7 REVIEW ONLY MODE  74
          3.8 SUMMARY  74
          Chapter 4 - Communicating with Other Devices  75
          4.1 INTRODUCING TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND SETTINGS  75
          4.1.1 Cables  75
          4.1.1.1 Serial versus Parallel  76
          4.1.1.2 Gender  76
          4.1.1.3 Number of Pins  77
          4.1.1.4 Null Modem Cable Requirements  77
          4.1.2 Telecommunications Settings  77
          4.1.2.2 Parity  79
          4.1.2.3 Duplex  79
          4.1.2.4 Data Bits  80
          4.1.2.5 Stop Bits  80
          4.1.2.6 Handshaking  81
          4.1.2.7 The Interactive Mode  81
          4.1.2.8 Rejecting Ornamentation  82
          4.2 THE PORTABLE DISK DRIVE  83
          4.2.1 The Physical Design of the Disk Drive  83
          4.2.2 Retrieving a File from Disk  84
          4.2.3 Storing a File from the Braille 'n Speak to the Disk
              Drive  86
          ** 4.2.4 Transmitting Textfiles or Applications  87
          ** 4.2.4.1 Sending Files to the Disk Drive  87
          ** 4.2.4.2 Receiving Files from the Disk Drive  88







          4.2.4.3 Adding an Application to the Braille ''n Speak  89
          4.2.5 Reading the Directory from a Disk  90
          ** 4.2.6 The Spellchecker  91
          4.2.6.1 Adding a Word  92
          4.2.6.2 Bypassing the Word for the Rest of the Document  92
          4.2.6.3 Reading a Word in Context  92
          4.2.6.4 Correcting a Word  92
          4.2.6.5 Repeat a Word  93
          4.2.6.6 Getting Help  93
          4.2.6.7 Overlooking a Word      93
          4.2.6.8 Suggested Replacement Words  93
          4.3 PRINTERS, MODEMS, AND COMPUTERS  94
          4.3.1 Serial Port Active  94
          4.3.2 Appending Linefeeds  95
          4.3.3 Physical Page Format Considerations  96
          4.3.3.1 Double-Spacing  96
          4.3.3.2 Page Length, Line Width, and Margins  96
          4.3.3.3 Numbering Pages  97
          4.3.4 Sending Blocks of Text to Another Device  98
          4.3.5 Modems and Other Computers  100
          ** 4.3.6 Using Sophisticated Modem Protocols in
              Transmission  102
          4.4 THE BRAILLE 'N SPEAK AS A SPEECH SYNTHESIZER  106
          4.5 SENDING BRAILLE 'N SPEAK OUTPUT TO YOUR COMPUTER SCREEN 
              110
          4.6 SUMMARY  110
          Appendix A - Troubleshooting  111
          Appendix B - Quick Reference  120
          Appendix C - Technical Information about Serial Ports  137
          Appendix D - ASCII Braille Symbols  138







               About This ManualAbout This Manual
               This manual is your "road map" as you explore the Braille 'n
          Speak's modes, features and functions.  In each chapter, we
          discuss commands and the tasks they perform; and, we provide you
          with detailed examples of how to apply them in your daily life.
               Each chapter focuses on a specific topic area and takes you
          through all of the commands related to that topic in detail.  We
          point out those features unique to the Braille 'n Speak 640, but
          most areas covered are applicable to both the Braille 'n Speak
          Classic and the Braille 'n Speak 640.
               Here is a key to the map:
               Introduction: Tells you what a Braille 'n Speak is.
               Chapter 1 - Getting Started: Explains what to do with the
          Braille 'n Speak when you take it out of the box for the first
          time.
               Chapter 2 - Working with Your Files: Walks you slowly and
          pain lessly, step-by-step, through the process of reading and
          writing in your files as well as manipulating them.
               Chapter 3 - Working with Other Tools: Gives you a guided
          tour of the Braille 'n Speak's built-in tools - the calendar, the
          calcu lator, the stopwatch, the timer, and much more - with
          practical examples of how you can optimize their power.
               Chapter 4 - Communicating with Other Devices: Works through
          the complicated business of file transfers, printing
          considerations and working with the external disk drive, all in
          simple language without the technobabble you usually find in
          discussions of telecommunications.
               Appendix A - Troubleshooting: Answers commonly asked
          questions about file recovery, file transfer screw-ups, and the
          like.
               Appendix B - Quick Reference: Provides a complete listing of
          Braille 'n Speak Classic and Braille 'n Speak 640 commands,
          organized by subject.
               Appendix C - Technical Information about Serial Ports:
          Provides technical specifications about the serial ports in the
          Braille 'n Speak for connecting the unit to nonstandard devices.
               Appendix D - Computer Braille Code: Provides a complete
          table for the ASCII character set in computer braille.
               By the time you finish exploring the Braille 'n Speak
          universe, you'll wonder how you managed without it.  So let's get
          started!







               Introduction
               What Is a Braille 'n Speak?
               The Braille 'n Speak is a computer that lets you braille
          into it and responds to you with speech.  It can translate your
          Grade 2 or Grade 1 braille into spoken words through its built-in
          speech synthesizer.
               Weighing less than one pound, and having its own internal,
          re chargeable battery and storage, this powerful computer can act
          as your notebook, your rollodex, your calendar, your calculator,
          your stopwatch, your timer, and much more.
               You can use a Braille 'n Speak comfortably and unobtrusively
          at a meeting, on a street corner or a subway, just as anyone uses
          a pencil and notepad.
               The Braille 'n Speak can "talk" with other computers -
          whether it's to store information on a disk or print it to a
          printer, or take information from another computer and store it
          for you to read later.  It can also link you to a wealth of
          information through the phone by using an external modem: news,
          shopping, research, conversation with other computer users, and
          so on.).
               If you have a personal computer with a screen access program
          (ASAP, Vocal-Eyes, Jaws - just to mention a few popular ones),
          you can turn your Braille 'n Speak into a portable speech synthe
          sizer through its "speech box" mode.  This can come in handy if
          you're on the go a lot and want to minimize the gear you carry or
          you suddenly have to access a computer at a colleague's desk (in
          a hurry).  It's much easier to carry a floppy with your screen
          access program on it and your Braille 'n Speak than to carry
          around an extra speech synthesizer.
               There are two models of the Braille 'n Speak: the Braille 'n
          Speak 640 and the Braille 'n Speak Classic.  The major difference
          between them is the capacity of the built-in storage.  The 640
          can store over six hundred physical pages of braille (or 640K of
          random-access memory) whereas the Braille 'n Speak Classic can
          store over two hundred physical pages of braille (or 180K).  Most
          commands are the same in both units, although there are some
          features unique to the Braille 'n Speak 640.  We will highlight
          these differences for you as they arise.  Overall, explanations
          apply to both models.







                             Chapter 1 - Getting Started

               Let's start by giving the Braille 'n Speak a physical to see
          what it looks like and to learn the basics about its use.
               The Braille 'n Speak is about the size of a video cassette. 
          Its keyboard consists of the standard seven-key, Perkins-style
          braillewriter.  The five rubber feet on its bottom prevent the
          machine from sliding around as you work.  Place the unit in front
          of you with the spacebar closest to you - the usual position in
          which you operate your braillewriter.
               Find the right corner closest to you and slide your finger
          toward the back of the unit.  About halfway, you'll find the
          "on/off" rocker switch.  To turn the Braille 'n Speak on, rock
          the switch away from you; to turn it off, rock it toward you.
               Immediately in back of the "on/off" rocker switch is an
          earphone jack.  You can also use this jack to connect your
          Braille 'n Speak to an external speaker or a patch cord to send
          the Braille 'n Speak's voice output to a tape recorder.
               Now, find the left corner of the unit that is closest to
          you. Slide your finger toward the back of the unit and find two
          rectangular openings with a bunch of little pins in each of them.
          These openings (called ports) are used to connect the Braille 'n
          Speak to other devices.  The port closest to you is used to
          connect the Braille 'n Speak to a portable
               disk drive (also available from Blazie Engineering). 
          Immediately in back of the disk drive port is a second port
          (called a serial port or an RS-232 port), which is used to
          connect the Braille 'n Speak to printers, other computers, and
          modems.
               In back of the two ports is the input jack for the A.C.
               power supply/battery charger.
               (WARNING:  When charging the Braille 'n Speak's built-in
          battery, you should use the wall transformer supplied with the
          unit, designed to provide the necessary voltage and current.
               Substituting another transformer which looks or feels like
          the

          correct one but which has the incorrect voltage requirements
            could cause the destruction of chips or other

               critical parts of the Braille 'n Speak.
               Under normal usage, a fully-charged Braille 'n Speak
          functions properly under battery power from fifteen to twenty
          hours, and it only takes eight hours to fully charge a Braille 'n
          Speak. However, the length of time a Braille 'n Speak can
          function under battery power varies according to how you use it. 
          For example, to use the Braille 'n Speak to communicate with
          another computer, you must activate the serial port.  Heavy use
          of the serial port with the Braille 'n Speak on battery power
          rather than on A.C. drains the battery more quickly.  (Note: We
          offer an emergency cable that lets  you power the Braille 'n
          Speak from an external battery, should you be unable to charge
          your battery immediate ly.)
               There is a handy safety feature on the Braille 'n Speak







          relevant to battery usage.  The Braille 'n Speak warns you when
          the battery starts getting low and continues to warn you every
          time you press a key, until you take action.  Experiment with
          your individual machine to see how much time it actually operates
          after the "Battery Low" message first occurs.  Operating your
          Braille 'n Speak for too long a time at this low voltage condi
          tion may cause the "scrambling" of data stored in the machine.
          Should this happen, you may be able to recover the data, as
          you'll see later.  If you do decide to experiment with the length
          of battery usage and your data, don't have any data you desper
          ately need to keep - at least not until you are familiar with how
          to recover data on the Braille 'n Speak.
               The Braille 'n Speak comes fully charged from the factory. 
          But eventually you'll need to recharge the battery.  Once you
          have done so, you must remember to set the Battery Use Timer. 
          We'll show you how to do that shortly.
               The optimal way to use the Braille 'n Speak is to keep it
          turned off most of the time when you are not in direct contact
          with it. In other words, if you are not reading, writing,
          computing or transmitting data, keep the unit turned off.  The
          beauty is that turning it off does not erase your data and
          turning it back on instantaneously places you wherever you had
          stopped.  In fact, the Braille 'n Speak does not like to be
          ignored and reminds you that it is still turned on with a "hello"
          message if 600you have not pressed a key within five minutes. 
          And it continues to try to get your attention in this way until
          you react - either by pressing a key or by turning it off.
               Now, let's go to work.
               1.1 THE FIRST TIME OUT
               Let's assume that you're starting from scratch, with the
          Braille 'n Speak set up as it comes straight from the factory.
               Turn the Braille 'n Speak "on" by flipping the "on/off"
          rocker switch away from you.  The unit says, "Braille 'n Speak
          ready; Help is open."  If this does
               not happen, flip the rocker switch back toward you to the
          "off" position and plug the A.C. power supply/battery charger
          into the A.C. jack and flip the switch "on" again.  You should
          then hear the announcement, "Braille 'n Speak ready; Help is
          open".
               Once you're comfortable with the Braille 'n Speak, or if
          you're in a setting where the Braille 'n Speak's start-up prompt
          might disturb a meeting, for example, you may choose to start up
          the Braille 'n Speak silently.  To do this, simply hold down the
          spacebar as you turn on the unit.  A click indicates that the
          Braille 'n Speak is ready for use.
               1.1.1 The Concept of Files
               Think of the Braille 'n Speak,  as it comes from the
          factory, as a nearly empty, three-ring binder just waiting for
          you to fill it with your own personal data.  Usually, a three-
          ring binder comes with tabs, or separators of some kind, to
          indicate the start of a new section in the binder.  The Braille
          'n Speak comes with a couple of "files" ready for your use: the
          Help file contains a summary of the commands you use to operate
          the Braille 'n Speak; the Clipboard is like a blank scratchpad







          (more on this later). The 640 includes an additional file, a
          calendar, for you to start filling up with your busy schedule.
               When you start up the Braille 'n Speak for the first time,
          after the announcement, "Braille 'n Speak ready", you hear the
          prompt, "Help is open."  As we mentioned earlier, the Braille 'n
          Speak keeps your place for you wherever you left off whenever you
          turn it off.  When you turn it on, it reminds you where you left
          off by announcing the name of the file that you left open.  Since
          this is your first time turning the unit on, it announces that
          you have the Help file open.
               1.1.2 How to Use The Commands
               All of the Braille 'n Speak's commands are produced by
          "chord ing".  If you've ever played a piano or other keyboard
          instru ment, you know that a chord refers to any two or more keys
          pressed together.  Isn't that what you do anyway when you
          braille, you might ask?  Yes.  But for our purposes, "chording"
          refers to the pressing of any combination of braille dots along
          with the spacebar.  So, for example, if we say, "Press the l-
          chord", we mean, "Press the spacebar together with dots 1-2-3
          (the braille letter l), making sure to press all the keys simul
          taneously.  Whenever we refer to a chord for a braille symbol
          other than a letter of the alphabet, we will write out the exact
          dots to be pressed in parentheses for clarity.  So, for example,
          when referring to an "ar-sign" in Grade 2 braille, we will also
          write out "dots 3-4-5" in parentheses.
               There are several levels of commands in the Braille 'n
          Speak: commands for menus of options, commands for navigating
          through your files and for performing various editing functions
          within those files, and commands for utilizing the Braille 'n
          Speak's built-in tools, such as running the stopwatch or storing
          to a floppy disk or computing a formula.  We'll get to each of
          these in separate chapters.  For now, let's just stick to the
          basic commands you'll use to get started.
               The Braille 'n Speak is pretty forgiving when it comes to
          abort ing the processing of a command.  You  usually press an
          e-chord to "enter" or "execute" a command, but most of the time,
          if you change your mind in midstream, you can cancel the process
          with a z-chord.  Depending on what you are doing, the Braille 'n
          Speak responds to an e-chord either by performing some command or
          by exiting a menu that you have entered (more on this later). 
          But if you do halt the processing of a command with a z-chord,
          the Braille 'n Speak announces, "Abort". Whew!
               1.1.3 The Concept of Menus
               As we mentioned above, the Braille 'n Speak has a set of
          commands for working with menus.  Just as a restaurant menu
          offers you choices of food, menus on a computer offer you choices
          of func tions to perform.  And a "submenu" offers more levels of
          choice.
               Continuing our restaurant menu analogy, let's say that the
          major menu is for breakfast, lunch and dinner.  Then if you pick
          the dinner menu, you'll see choices for appetizers, entrees,
          deserts and beverages.  Clearly, you'll then need to check out
          each of those sets of choices for which appetizer, entree and
          beverage you want - and, if you're very good, you'll skip the set







          of desert choices.
               The Braille 'n Speak's menu system works very much like a
          restau rant menu:  Basically, there is an Options menu, a Speech
          Parame ters menu, a Status menu and a Parameters menu.  Like the
          desert menu, each menu in the Braille 'n Speak provides you with
          choices of its own.  For example, from the Options menu, you can
          choose between Files, Date, Time, Stopwatch and Calculator.  Some
          of the menus are for performing functions, and issuing commands. 
          Some are for setting things to work to your specifications - like
          turning a setting on or off or switching among its various modes.
               We'll get into the menus as we need to in this manual.  For
          now, just remember that when you first turn on the Braille 'n
          Speak, you'll always be in the last file you worked on wherever
          you had left off in that file.  If you want to do something from
          a menu, you have to issue a command to get to the menu.  What's
          nice is that when you're finished with the menu, the Braille 'n
          Speak remembers to put you right back into your file, just where
          you last used it.
               1.2 MAKING THE BRAILLE 'n SPEAK TALK THE Way YOU WANT
               Before we look at the files that come in the Braille 'n
          Speak from the factory, let's get the unit talking in the way
          that is most comfortable for you.
               You can adjust the speech in the Braille 'n Speak in several
          ways: not only can you adjust the volume, the rate of speech and
          the pitch and tone of the voice, but you can also adjust how the
          Braille 'n Speak handles the announcement of punctuation and
          numbers.  To change any of these speech parameters, we use a
          command to take us into a menu of options for setting speech
          parameters.
               Press ar-sign-chord (dots 3-4-5) to open the Speech
          Parameters menu.  The Braille 'n Speak prompts you with, "Set
          speech parame ters" and waits for you to enter an option.  Should
          you enter an option that the Braille 'n Speak does not recognize,
          it prompts you with, "Invalid parameter" and waits for you to try
          again.  To exit this menu, as you exit all menus in the Braille
          'n Speak, press an e-chord and the Braille 'n Speak says, "Exit". 
          Let's run through the options available in the Speech Parameters
          menu:
               1.2.1 Volume, Rate of Speech, Pitch, and Tone
               The speech parameters for volume, rate of speech, pitch, and
          tone are easy to manipulate.  To make the Braille 'n Speak talk
          louder press dot 4, faster dot 5, in a higher pitched voice dot
          6, with a higher tone dots 5-6.  Conversely, to make the Braille
          'n Speak talk softer press dot 1, slower dot 2, in a lower
          pitched voice dot 3, in a lower tone dots 2-3.  Each time you
          press one of the above dot commands, the Braille 'n Speak
          announces what you have done while producing the desired effect. 
          So, for example, when you press dot 4, the Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Louder" in a louder voice.  When you press dot 2, it says,
          "Slower" in a slower voice, and so on.  Naturally, there is a
          limit as to how soft/loud and how fast/slow and even how high or
          low you can make the voice.  If you go too far in the "Softer"
          direction for volume, for example, you'll stop hearing the
          Braille 'n Speak announce "Softer".  Don't panic.  Just press dot







          4 a couple of times to bring the volume back to where you can
          hear it again.
               Notice that we have not said, "Press dot 4-chord, dot
          2-chord" or whatever.  You are already in the menu since you
          pressed an ar- sign-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak knows that you
          are in a menu. Until you press an e-chord, the Braille 'n Speak
          thinks that any keys you press are attempts to make a choice in
          the Speech Parameters menu.
               Experiment with the volume, rate of speech, pitch, and tone
          to find a set of levels that is comfortable for you.  The Braille
          'n Speak remembers how you've set these parameters and keeps the
          voice set just as you leave it when you exit the menu and even
          after you turn off the unit and turn it on again.  If you decide
          to return to the factory settings for speech, or anything else
          for that matter, there is a way to do that.  We'll show you
          later.
               1.2.2 Announcement of Punctuation and Numbers
               Another set of speech parameters that you can change to your
          liking in the Braille 'n Speak has to do with the way in which
          the Braille 'n Speak handles the announcement of punctuation
          marks and numbers.  If you want to hear a total announcement of
          punctuation marks - all of them, regardless of what and where
          they are - write the letter t (total punctuation).  To hear most
          punctuation announced, write the letter m and to hear only some
          punctuation, write the letter s.  If you want to hear no punctua
          tion announced whatsoever, write the letter z.  Remember, none of
          these settings is permanent.  You can change them at any time.
               The Braille 'n Speak has two options for pronouncing
          numbers. You may prefer to hear numbers spoken as digits or as
          full words. Write the letter n to switch between these two modes. 
          For exam ple, if you write the letter n and the Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Full numbers", this means that when you are reading a
          number, the Braille 'n Speak will say the full number, like "two
          thou sand".  If you write the letter n again from within the
          Speech Parameters menu, the Braille 'n Speak prompts you with,
          "Digits". The next time you read a number, the Braille 'n Speak
          will pronounce each digit, like "two zero zero zero".
               You'll probably want to set the Braille 'n Speak to read in
          digits most of the time since phone numbers and addresses, zip
          codes and the like, are easier to listen to as digits.  If you
          keep numerical data, such as money information for your bank
          account, in your Braille 'n Speak, chances are that you'll want
          the Braille 'n Speak to pronounce full numbers to you for those
          times when you need that specific information read to you.
               There are several other speech options available from the
          menu, which we will talk about in Chapter 4.  They have more
          complicat ed uses.  For now, the basic speech parameters outlined
          here will get you started using the Braille 'n Speak with the
          most comfort able voice for you.
               You are now ready to start reading and writing files.







          Chapter 2 - Working with Your FilesChapter 2 - Working with Your
          Files

               Before we can begin reading or writing anything in a file on
          the Braille 'n Speak, we need to talk about braille translation
          and ASCII.
               The Braille 'n Speak has a built-in braille translator for
          Grade 2 and Grade 1 braille.  You may have heard the term "ASCII"
          (pro nounced ask-ee) from computer users.  ASCII - American
          Standard Code for Information Interchange - is a code used by
          most comput ers today that are accessible to blind users.  You
          need to become familiar with some of this code in order to
          respond to prompts in the Braille 'n Speak.
               But wait!  Don't panic.  Basically, the ASCII character set
          consists of all the letters and numbers, punctuation marks, etc.,
          with which you are already acquainted.  You'll probably not need
          to learn the rest of the ASCII character set, unless you're into
          writing Greek letters and other unusual symbols.
               The braille equivalent of ASCII (known as computer braille
          code) consists of the braille alphabet you already know plus some
          twists for punctuation and numbers.  It's important that you be
          able to write punctuation marks in computer braille as they
          differ from those you know in Grade 1 or Grade 2 braille.  In
          addition, the digits 0 through 9 are written in the four lower
          dots of the braille cell.  1 is a "dropped A", 2 a "dropped B"
          etc.  You don't need to precede any of these "dropped" numbers by
          a number sign.  Punctuation marks differ from those used in
          literary
               braille but they are easy to learn.  (See Appendix D at the
          back of this manual for a complete list of computer braille
          equiva lents to the braille ASCII character set.)
               For the most part, you write in Grade 2 braille and the
          Braille 'n Speak translates automatically to speak back what you
          brail led.  However, you must be in the appropriate braille
          translation mode for you to hear words spoken back to you instead
          of gibber ish.
               The Braille 'n Speak Classic comes from the factory with
          braille translation set to "off".  (Note: The 640 comes from the
          factory with braille translation set to "off" except for the
          "calendar" file, where braille translation is set to "on".)  If
          braille translation is set to "on", the Braille 'n Speak assumes
          that the contents of the currently open file is Grade 2 braille
          and it translates accordingly.
               For now, just remember that the Help file we're using for
          prac tice, included in your Braille 'n Speak from the factory, is
          a file that has braille translation set to "off".  After we
          discuss how to read what's in a file, we'll come back to this
          issue of braille translation to show you how to switch between
          modes.
               Now let's find out how to read what's in your Braille 'n
          Speak.
               2.1 READING IN YOUR FILES
               You have control over how much of the text in a file the
          Braille 'n Speak reads to you at any one time.  You can command







          the Braille 'n Speak to read by paragraphs, by sentences, line by
          line, word by word, even character by character.  Or, if you
          prefer, you can command it to read the entire contents of a file
          without stopping. You can have it spell a word for you.  You can
          specify the level of punctuation you want announced as you read.
          It can even read you the translation of many of the Grade 2
          braille contractions or at least tell you what dots make up a
          character - for example, "in" for the Grade 2  contraction
          represented by dots 3-5 or "3-4" for the Grade 2 braille contrac
          tion for "st".
               2.1.1 The Cursor
               If you've ever worked with a Perkins brailler or a slate and
          sty lus, you are familiar with the concept of a cursor, although
          you may not have ever called it that.  In computer jargon, the
          "cur sor", used for reading and writing,  refers to the
          electronic equivalent of your stylus or the brailler's punching
          mechanism. The cursor is very important because it marks the
          place where this electronic "stylus" is resting.  You can't feel
          it anywhere on the Braille 'n Speak, but you can move it via
          commands and you can find out where it is in your file and even
          what character is "under" it.
               When we talk about moving through a file to read by
          sentence, paragraph or whatever, it means that we're moving the
          cursor to a particular place in that file and commanding the
          Braille 'n Speak to read from that location.  Naturally, you can
          move the cursor forward and backward through a file.
               2.1.2 Navigating through a File
               Moving through your files on the Braille 'n Speak is much
          faster than turning braille pages.  You can move instantly to the
          top or bottom (beginning or end) of your file, search for a
          particular word or move by a specific number of lines.  Moving to
          a desired location does not automatically mean that the Braille
          'n Speak will read you what is there.
               Let's practice moving around the Help file that is open
          automati cally the first time you turn on your Braille 'n Speak.
               To move to the top or beginning of the file, press an
          l-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Top of file".  To move to
          the bottom or end of the file, press a dots 4-5-6-chord.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "End of file".  Once again, notice that it
          does not read anything, simply tells you where your cursor is in
          the file. Knowing where your cursor is in a file becomes crucial,
          as you'll see, in writing.  The Braille 'n Speak remembers where
          you left off in each file, even after you turn it off and turn it
          on again.  Whenever you reopen a file, your cursor will be
          wherever you last used it in that file.
               Now suppose that you know how many lines you want to move
          forward or backward in your file.  Press a number-sign-chord
          (dots 3-4-5- 6).  The Braille 'n Speak asks, "Enter number of
          lines to move". Write a number, using the "dropped" braille
          notation we discussed at the beginning of this chapter, followed
          by an e-chord (to execute the command).  To move backward a
          number of lines, simply respond to the "Enter number of lines to
          move" prompt by writing a minus sign (dots 3-6) before the
          number, followed by an e- chord.  The Braille 'n Speak moves the







          cursor backward or forward the number of lines you requested and
          reads you the line where the cursor is now resting.
               All right, enough with the suspense.  Let's look at how to
          read what's in the Help file.
               2.1.3 Reading Blocks of Text
               The commands for reading on the Braille 'n Speak are very
          easy to remember because they revolve around the position of the
          spacebar on the physical unit.  To read the line, word or
          character where your cursor is currently resting, press a c-chord
          for current line, press a dots 2-5-chord for current word and
          press a dots 3- 6-chord for current character.  To move the
          cursor and read forward or backward by a line, word or character,
          press a dot 4- chord for next line and a dot 1-chord for previous
          line, press a dot 5-chord for next word and a dot 2-chord for
          previous word, and press a dot 6-chord for next character and a
          dot 3-chord for previous character.
               Notice how moving the cursor forward involves chords with
          the keys to the right of the spacebar and moving the cursor
          backward involves chords with the keys to the left of the
          spacebar. Another way to think of it is to say that chords
          involving dots closest to the spacebar are for lines, chords
          using the middle dots are for words and chords using the dots
          furthest from the spacebar are for single characters.
               If you want to move to the next or previous paragraph from
          where you are in your file, press a dots 5-6-chord for the next
          para graph and a dots 2-3-chord for the previous one.  The
          Braille 'n Speak moves the cursor to the next or previous
          paragraph and reads you the first line of that paragraph.  Again,
          notice that forward cursor movement involves a chord to the right
          of the spacebar and backward cursor movement involves a chord to
          the left of the spacebar.
               If you want the Braille 'n Speak to read you the entire
          contents of a file, or if you want to read from where you are in
          the file all the way to the end of the file, press an er-sign-
          chord (dots 1-2-4-5-6).  The Braille 'n Speak starts reading from
          your current cursor location, whether at the beginning of the
          file or not, and continues nonstop to the end of the file. 
          Pressing a z- chord automatically halts the voice, leaving the
          cursor at the last word spoken.
               This is a good a time as any to talk about the Braille 'n
          Speak's definition of "line" and "sentence".
               The Braille 'n Speak defines a "line" and "paragraph" based
          on the location of carriage returns or carriage return/linefeed
          pairs.  (On a physical piece of paper, a carriage return moves
          you to the beginning of a line and a linefeed moves you down a
          line.  You don't need linefeeds in a Braille 'n Speak document.
          You'll see why later.) 
               The Braille 'n Speak sees all text between one carriage
          return and the next as a single "line" of text.  It considers all
          text between a set of two or more carriage returns and the next
          set of two or more carriage returns to be a "paragraph".  It
          defines all text between one period, question mark, or
          exclamation point and the next instance of one of these
          punctuation marks to be a "sentence".







               By the way, the Braille 'n Speak may issue a "plink" sound
          when you run across a set of two or more carriage returns.  If
          you don't want to hear this, from anywhere in yor currently open
          file, press an and-sign-chord (dots 1-2-3-4-6).  The Braille 'n
          Speak says, "Skip blank lines, enter y or n".  Press a letter y.
          From now on, you won't hear any distinguishing sound to tell you
          that you've passed over extra carriage returns.  (This mode may
          also be changed from the Status menu with the same and-sign
          command.  See Appendix B.)
               In addition to being able to read by lines or sentences, you
          can read by blocks of text from 20 to 80 characters in length,
          referred to as "windows".  (This is most useful when interacting
          with a computer or modem. See Section 4.3.)
               You can choose among these three reading modes: windows,
          lines, or sentences.  To switch among modes, press a w-chord from
          anywhere in your currently open file.  The Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Speak windows, lines, or sentences".  Whichever option you
          choose, a w, l or s, the Braille 'n Speak says, "Okay".  From
          then on, it will read you text in the mode you selected.
               Notice that we didn't say to enter an e-chord to execute the
          com mand to switch among reading modes.  This is one case where
          you don't need to press an e-chord to execute the command.  The
          Braille 'n Speak simply places you in your selected mode when you
          respond to the prompt by saying, "Okay".  You can cycle among the
          three modes in a flash as you read.  And the Braille 'n Speak
          even remembers the mode you selected last the next time you turn
          it on.
               As with reading lines, you move forward or backward a window
          or sentence at a time by pressing a dot 4-chord to move forward
          and a dot 1-chord to move backward.  And of course, to read the
          current window or sentence, simply press a c-chord.
               Note: If you select the window option, you must also select
          the length of the window, preset to 80 from the factory.  You can
          see its current setting by entering the Status menu with an st-
          sign- chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Status menu" and
          something like, "Interactive on".  (Don't worry about that prompt
          right now.  Just be aware that whenever you enter the Status
          menu, besides the prompt confirming that you've entered it, you
          hear a prompt for the status of whatever setting you last
          checked.)  For now just write a w to hear "window length 80". 
          You may change the setting at this time to any number between 20
          and 80 and press an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak confirms your
          change by repeating it to you.  Press another e-chord to exit the
          Status menu.  Or, you can simply change the window length
          parameter from the Parameters menu by pressing a p-chord.  At the
          "Enter parame ter" prompt, write a w to hear "window length 80". 
          The number depends on how the parameter was set last.  Change it
          to a number between 20 and 80 and press an e-chord.  The Braille
          'n Speak says, "Okay" to confirm. 
               Now let's turn to another reading capability of the Braille
          'n Speak.  What if you need a word spelled? Move your cursor to
          the word by pressing dot 2-chords (to go backward) or dot
          5-chords (to go forward) until the cursor is resting on the word
          you want spelled.  Press the chord for current word (dots







          2-5-chord) twice to have the word spelled.  In fact, you can
          continue having every word spelled as you move back and forth
          with dot 2-chords and dot 5-chords.  Exit this "spelling" mode
          with any other chord.
               What if you need to identify a letter or braille character
          that is unclear?  Letters like B, D, G, P, T, V and Z may sound
          alike when pronounced by a speech synthesizer.  Press a dots
          3-6-chord, the command to read the current character, twice to
          hear a clarification of the letter.  The Braille 'n Speak first
          pro nounces the letter and then gives you a word that starts with
          that letter for clarity.  So, for example, say you're on the
          letter c.  Press dots 3-6-chord twice.  At the first dots 3-6-
          chord, you hear, "c", at the second dots 3-6-chord you hear,
          "Charlie".
               Take a few minutes to experiment with reading, using the
          current ly open Help file.
               2.1.4 Some Tips on Reading
               The Automatic Braille Translator: Remember that we said we'd
          come back to the issue of braille translation?  Let's see what
          happens if braille translation is set incorrectly in a file.  For
          sample purposes, we'll work with the Help file in the 640 but the
          lesson applies to both models.
               Get to the top of the Help file with an l-chord.  Now press
          a c-chord to read the current line.  The 640 says, "Braille 'n
          Speak 640 Help File".  Now let's play a trick on the Braille 'n
          Speak.  Enter the Parameters menu by pressing a p-chord.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter parameter".  Write the letter t
          (for translation).  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Braille transla
          tor; enter y or n?"  Write a y, to turn on braille translation.
               The Braille 'n Speak remembers where you were in your file
          and returns you there after you're finished with a menu.  So
          let's see what happens when we try to read the current line. 
          Press a c-chord.  You should hear something like, "Braille not
          Speak 640 Help file".  What happened?  Well, the braille
          translator sees the "'n" and translates it into the word "not" -
          that's what.  So the point is that if you ever get into a file
          that sounds like gibberish, chances are that you have braille
          translation turned to the mode opposite what it should be for
          that file.
               Let's get out of this, quick.  Press a p-chord again to get
          back into the Parameters menu.  At the "Enter parameter" prompt,
          write the letter t.  At the "Braille translator; enter y or n?"
          prompt, write an n.  Now press a c-chord again.  The 640 should
          read accurately again, with braille translation "off".
               The Braille 'n Speak remembers whether you want braille
          trans lation "on" or "off" for each of your files.  When you go
          through your list of existing files, if braille translation is
          "on" for a file, the Braille 'n Speak reminds you by saying,
          "Braille file" after telling you its name.
               This issue of braille translation will come up again when we
          look at transmitting files from the Braille 'n Speak to a
          computer or vice versa and it is a definite consideration when
          sending a Braille 'n Speak file directly to a printer.  So it's
          worth taking a minute to practice moving back and forth between







          braille translation modes here in the Help file.  It's safe.  You
          can't damage this file even if you try to write in it.  It is
          protected from overanxious beginners.  When we get into writing,
          you'll see how you can protect files yourself.
               Special Types of Characters:
               The Braille 'n Speak can identify uppercase characters and
          control characters to you as you read through your file.  (Con
          trol characters are used largely for formatting purposes to
          instruct a printer where to place your text.  Common examples
          include carriage returns, linefeeds, formfeeds and tabs.  We'll
          show you how to write them in yourself later.)
               As you're reading along in the Help file, practicing moving
          from line to line, paragraph to paragraph, and so on, notice that
          the Braille 'n Speak uses the normal inflections of speech and
          pauses at commas, periods and question marks.  If you move your
          cursor forward or backward a character at a time, the Braille 'n
          Speak reads an uppercase character in a significantly higher-
          than- normal pitch.  If it sees a "control" character, it reads
          it to you as well.
               The Braille 'n Speak doesn't normally bother to read control
          characters to you if you're just going along reading paragraphs
          or lines in your file.  But as you move the cursor a character at
          a time, it does read them to you when it encounters them.
               Now, take a few minutes to practice reading before you move
          on to learning about how to find text in your files.
               2.2 SEARCHING FOR TEXT IN A FILE
               The Braille 'n Speak can look for a word faster than you
          could if you had a printout of the file.  Since you can look for
          text going forward or backward in your file, it's probably a good
          idea to know where your cursor is located when you're starting
          your search.
               2.2.1 The Location of the Cursor
               To find out where the cursor is currently resting, press a
          wh- sign-chord (dots 1-5-6) from anywhere within your file.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says something like, "Column 5, cursor at 119".
          This means that the cursor is resting on the fifth place on a
          line and that you are one hundred and nineteen characters into
          the file.  If the cursor happens to be resting on a carriage re
          turn, you'll hear "Column 0" instead of any other number.
               Now let's search for text.
               2.2.2 Finding Text
               You can search for text forward or backward through your
          current ly open file.  When you issue the Find command, you enter
          a "search buffer" - a scratchpad of sorts - until you press an e-
          chord.  If you change your mind and decide not to search for this
          particular text after all, you can cancel the search with a z-
          chord.  While in the scratchpad, you can write text (also re
          ferred to as a search string) of up to 63 characters in length.
          You can use the backspace (b-chord) to erase a character, just as
          you can when you're writing.  And you can press a c-chord to see
          what you've written so far.  Let's see how it works.
               Press an f-chord from anywhere within your file.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter text to find".  Write a search
          string, the word "speech", for example, followed by an e-chord to







          execute the command.  If the text is in your file, the Braille 'n
          Speak moves the cursor to its beginning and reads forward to the
          next car riage return.  If it does not find the text, you hear,
          "not found".  The cursor remains in the place where you started
          your search and the Braille 'n Speak reads you from that cursor
          location to the next carriage return.
               If you want to reverse the search, start with an f-chord. 
          But when you hear, "Enter text to find", write the text, followed
          by a th-sign-chord (dots 1-4-5-6).  If the text is found, the
          Braille 'n Speak moves the cursor to its beginning and reads
          forward to the next carriage return.  If it does not find it, you
          hear, "not found".
               The Braille 'n Speak remembers the text you last asked it to
          find, even from file to file.  This can be a handy feature when
          you're looking for the same text in a number of different files.
               Let's practice using the 640 Help file as an example.
               Press an l-chord to move to the top of the Help file.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Top of file".  Press a wh-sign-chord to
          see where we are in the file, just to make sure that we are where
          we think we are.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Column 0, cursor at
          1".  Good.  That means that we are indeed at the very first
          character location in the file.
               Now, let's look for a word.  Press an f-chord.  The Braille
          'n Speak says, "Enter text to find".  Let's look for the word
          "read".  Write the word "read", making sure to spell out each
          braille letter.  Do not use Grade 2 braille.  Remember?  The Help
          file is not a "braille" file.  It comes from the factory written
          as a print file in uncontracted braille.  Now press an e-chord to
          execute the Find command.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Reading
          Functions".
               Notice that it found a variation of the word we were looking
          for, "reading".  The Braille 'n Speak looks for the combination
          of characters we requested but it finds the first text it
          encounters that may include the combination of characters we
          asked it to find.  If you had really wanted to find "read" and
          only that specific word, you should have searched for the string
          "space read space".
               For now, let's just use this example to find out whether
          there are more instances of the word "read" in this Help file. 
          Press an f-chord again.  Even though the Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Enter text to find" again, it still remembers that we last
          looked for the word "read".  So let's just press an e-chord.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Read current line, c-chord".  We could go
          along in this fashion, finding every occurrence of the word
          "read" or any variation of that word in the file, all without
          ever rewriting the word "read" at the prompt.  In fact, even if
          we switched files, we could still look for the same word.
               Where are we in the file at this point?  Assuming that we
          stopped searching for "read" when the Braille 'n Speak found
          "reading functions", press a wh-sign-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says something like, "Column 13, cursor at 52", indicating that
          the cursor is at the thirteenth place on a line and that we are
          fifty-two characters into the Help file.  Now let's press an
          f-chord.  At the prompt, press a th-sign-chord (dots 1-4-5-6).







          The Braille 'n Speak says, "not found, reading functions".  All
          this means is that it did not find any instance of the word
          "read" searching backward through the file.  That's fine.  We
          knew that it wouldn't find one.  But see how important it can be
          to know where the cursor is?
               Try finding a word or phrase on your own.  Move to different
          places in the Help file as you search.  Once comfortable with the
          process, you'll find that you can flip through a file and find a
          phone number faster than you can thumb through a rollodex.
               2.2.3 Case Sensitive Searches for Text
               The Braille 'n Speak disregards case when searching for text
          un less you select it to be case-sensitive.  To select case sensi
          tivity in searching for text, before you issue the Find command,
          press a the-sign-chord (dots 2-3-4-6).  The Braille 'n Speak
          prompts you with, "Distinguish case during find; enter y or n?"
          Write a letter y if you do want searches to be case-sensitive.
          Write a letter n if you don't.  Most of the time, you won't want
          case-sensitivity turned on for a search.  Either way, the Braille
          'n Speak responds, "Okay". From that point on, until you change
          it, the Braille 'n Speak performs searches according to your
          selection.
               Here's an example using our old friend, the Help file.
               Go to the top of the file with an l-chord.  Now press a the-
          sign- chord (dots 2-3-4-6).  The Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Distinguish case during find; enter y or n?"  Write a letter y
          and the Braille 'n Speak says, "Okay".  Now press an f-chord and, 
          at the prompt, "Enter text to find", write "blazie" followed by
          an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak responds, "not found; Braille
          'n Speak Help file" (or "not found; Braille 'n Speak 640 Help
          File").  Either the word is not in the file or "blazie" is not in
          lowercase.  Maybe "blazie" is written in
               capital letters.
               To make the Braille 'n Speak let you write uppercase
          letters,
               press a u-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Uppercase". 
          Press another u-chord to "lock" the Braille 'n Speak into
          uppercase mode.  The Braille 'n Speak now says, "Uppercase
          locked".  This is like the shift lock on a typewriter or the caps
          lock on a
               computer.  Every letter you write on the Braille 'n Speak is
          now interpreted as an uppercase character.
               Press an f-chord.  Now answer the prompt, "Enter text to
          find", by writing "blazie" again, remembering that every
          character you're writing is assumed to be in uppercase.  The
          Braille 'n Speak comes back with, "not found; Braille 'n Speak
          Help file" (or "not found; Braille 'n Speak 640 Help file".)
               What's wrong now?  It looks like "BLAZIE" is not in the file
          ei ther.  It must be that the word is spelled with only the first
          letter in uppercase.  Let's unlock our uppercase and try again.
          To unlock uppercase, press a q-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Uppercase unlocked, okay".  Now press an f-chord and at the
          "Enter text to find" prompt, press a u-chord, then write
          "blazie".  Remember, since you only pressed the u-chord once,
          only the first letter you wrote (the "B") is assumed to be in







          uppercase.  The "lazie" is assumed to be in lowercase.  Now press
          an e-chord to see if this time the Braille 'n Speak can find this
          elusive word.
               Yes.  The Braille 'n Speak now says, "Blazie Engineering". 
          Well, that took some effort, didn't it?  See why it's probably
          better to have case- sensitivity "off"?  Let's turn it off right
          now, shall we?  Press a the-sign-chord.  At the "Distinguish case
          during find; enter y or n" prompt, write an emphatic letter n.
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "Okay".  From now on, it should be
          easy again to find text without worrying about its case.
               The Click tip:  When you have large files, you'll probably
          hear a ticking sound as the Braille 'n Speak is searching for
          text.  The larger the file, the greater the distance the Braille
          'n Speak may have to travel, looking for your text, the greater
          the number of clicks you will hear.  But not to worry, just be
          patient and it will find your text - if it is there to be found.
               Cancelling a Search: Even after you've pressed the e-chord
          that starts a search, you can cancel it with a z-chord.  This can
          be handy with a long search in a large file.
               2.3 WRITING IN YOUR FILES
               B fore we can write anything in the Braille 'n Speak, we
          must create a file in which to write - or, in other words, open a
          blank page in our "binder" and give the file a name.  And speak
          ing of pages, let's talk for a minute about this:

          The Braille 'n Speak "Page"

               The Braille 'n Speak defines a file as having a predefined
          number of "pages".  In other words, it needs to know how many
          "pages" you want to use from the "binder" for each of your files.
          These "pages" each can hold up to 4,096 characters, something
          over four physical pages of braille. The thing that is most
          important to understand here is that you need to define the
          number of "pages" you want to use in your file.
               The Braille 'n Speak Classic can hold forty-five "pages" and
          the 640 can hold over one hundred and fifty of them.  Remember,
          these are not physical braille pages, nor are they physical print
          pages.  They are the Braille 'n Speak's version of "page". Later,
          you'll see how easy it is to know how many physical braille or
          physical print pages are really in your file.  Also, even though
          you tell the Braille 'n Speak that you want, say, three "pages"
          in your file, you can change your mind later and add "pages" to
          your file or get rid of extra ones you don't need after all.  The
          bottom line is that the "pages" are each 4,096 characters worth
          of space.
               Now, let's create a file and start writing.  To do this, we
          first have to get to the Options menu and its submenu, the Files
          menu.
               2.3.1 The Files Menu
               Like any powerful computer, the Braille 'n Speak lets you
          manipu late your files.  From the Files menu you can: open an
          existing file and work in it, create a new file, rename an
          existing file, delete an unwanted file, even make an existing
          file bigger or smaller.







               One of the best features of the Braille 'n Speak is that you
          never have to "save" a file.  Any computer user knows how it
          feels to work diligently in a file, creating a masterpiece, only
          to have it disappear into that dreaded, computer blackhole.  The
          Braille 'n Speak isn't like that.  The instant you create a file
          and name it, that file is "saved" for you and anything you enter
          into it, is automatically saved, too - yes, even when you turn
          the unit off.  As we have mentioned earlier in this chapter,
          turning the Braille 'n Speak on and off does not affect your
          files in any way.  It's like turning a radio off and turning it
          on again.  Unless someone has come along and fiddled with the
          dial, you'll still be tuned to the same station when you turn it
          on again.
               2.3.2 Creating a File
               Let's create a file.  To get to the Files menu, press an
          o-chord. The Braille 'n Speak says, "Option".  Now write a letter
          f.  The Braille 'n Speak responds, "Enter file command".  Notice
          that we didn't tell you to press an e-chord yet.  The Braille 'n
          Speak is now in "menu" mode waiting for a command.  Only after
          you issue a command can you press an e-chord.
               Since our immediate goal is to create a file, let's write a
          letter c.  The Braille 'n Speak now prompts you for a name for
          your file with, "Enter file to create".  Let's call our file
          "practice".  Write "practice", spelling out each letter, and
          press an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak now asks for the number
          of pages in your file with, "Enter the file size".  Let's just
          write a number "1" for now.  Remember to enter the number in
          ASCII or dropped number notation (dot 2) and press an e-chord.
          Finally, the Braille 'n Speak asks whether you want braille
          translation to be in effect for this file with, "Use Grade 2
          translator; enter y or n".  Let's write a letter y.  The Braille
          'n Speak confirms that we have created the file by saying,
          "practice now open".  We're in our file, a blank "page", ready to
          be filled with our personal data.
               Notice that we didn't have to press an e-chord after
          answering the prompt about braille translation mode.  The Braille
          'n Speak assumes that if you're creating a file, you want to open
          it and write in it immediately.  So it opens the file for you.
               Before we write in this new file, let's talk for a moment
          about file naming conventions.
               Filenames in the Braille 'n Speak may be up to twenty
          characters in length.  We suggest that you name files with no
          Grade 2 braille contractions.  (You'll see why later.)
               However, if you plan to send Braille 'n Speak files to a PC,
          modem, or our external disk drive, you must name your files using
          MS DOS file naming conventions to prevent confusion for yourself
          later.  Briefly, this means that your filenames may consist of
          two parts: a "filename" portion of up to eight characters in
          length and an "extension" portion of up to three characters in
          length separated by a period.  For example, a file could be
          called "address.txt" or simply "address".  But it's not a good
          idea to call a file "phonebook" because the PC will only recog
          nize "phoneboo" and you may think your file "phonebook" never
          made it to the PC when you transmitted it.  More on all this in







          Chapter 4 and Appendix a.  For now, just be aware of the concept.
               Back in our newly created file "practice", we're almost
          ready to write some text.  But we still should check out some
          things first:
               Where is the cursor in our file?  Press a wh-sign-chord. 
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "File is empty".  And it should be. 
          We haven't written anything yet.  Try going to the top of the
          file (l-chord) or end of the file (dots 4-5-6-chord).  Try
          pressing a c-chord to hear what's on the current line.  The
          Braille 'n Speak should say, "File is empty".
               We should also find out how much room there is in this file
          and how to get help if we get stuck.
               2.3.3 Room Left in Your File
               To see how much room there is left to write in your
          currently open file (in other words, how much free space there is
          after the last character in a file), press an r-chord.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Room left is 4,096."  Good, that is the
          size of one Braille 'n Speak "page" and since we haven't written
          anything yet, we should have 4,096 free spaces left to use.  As
          you start to fill up the file, this number will decrease.  Don't
          worry about running out of room, though.  We can make the file
          bigger if we need more space.
               2.3.4 Getting Help
               You may have figured out by now that the Help file is a
          brief listing of commands.  It assumes that you know how to do
          things with the Braille 'n Speak and only want a tickler, a
          reminder, of the specific way to execute a command.  It can be
          very handy and is accessible from any file in your Braille 'n
          Speak.
               Just need to jog your memory about a command?  Press a th-
          sign- chord (dots 1-4-5-6) from within any file.  (By the way,
          the th- sign is a question mark in computer braille.  This may
          help you to remember that chording the th-sign means help.)  The
          Braille 'n Speak immediately jumps you into the Help file and
          says, "Help now open".  Check through the Help file for what you
          need - with the Find command, say - and then press a z-chord to
          abort this procedure.  You'll find yourself back where you were
          in your file.  Try it out with your currently open file,
          "practice".
               2.3.5 Writing Text in Your File
               Now write the sentence, "This is a practice file to learn
          how to write in the Braille 'n Speak."  Don't worry if you make
          mis takes.  We can fix them.  Notice as you write that the
          Braille 'n Speak is saying every letter as you braille it.  And,
          are you re membering to write in Grade 2 braille?
               Let's see where your cursor is now.  Do a wh-sign-chord. 
          The Braille 'n Speak should say, "Column 56; cursor at 57" -
          assuming that you didn't make any mistakes and that you wrote in
          Grade 2 braille.  We are at position 56 on the current line and
          we are 57 characters from the beginning of the file.  Don't worry
          if your numbers for column and cursor location differ from ours. 
          Remem ber, this is only an example.  What's important is that the
          column number is greater than zero.  Keep that in mind.
               Now do another r-chord and see how much room you have left







          in your file.  The Braille 'n Speak should say something like,
          "Room left is 4,039."  You'll have to write quite a bit before
          you run out of room, trust us.  Remember, you're using up Braille
          'n Speak space, not physical space on a piece of paper.  That's
          what's so nice.
               It's going to be important to know how to format your files
          for printing.  So let's take a brief look right now at how this
          is done before we write anything else.  We'll take a more
          detailed look at physical page formatting in Chapter 4.
               2.3.6 Writing Control Characters into a File
               In Section 2.1.4 we said that control characters are special
          characters used for formatting your files for printing.  Basical
          ly, these special characters are actually codes that instruct the
          printer about things like when to go to the next physical line on
          the page, when to go back to the left margin on a line, how many
          spaces to tab over, when to go to the next physical page, and so
          on.  Some control code sequences get real fancy and we won't
          discuss them here.  We'll concentrate instead on the ones you use
          the most in writing.  A more complete list is in Appendix D in
          the back of this manual.
               Before we review the commonly used control characters and
          show you how to write them, let's backtrack for a minute to
          review the concept of word processing in general.
               Back in the days when you typed on a typewriter or a
          braillewrit er, you were limited in many ways.  You could never
          insert a word here, delete a paragraph there, change one word to
          another, copy text from one page to another, etc., without
          retyping.  Word pro cessing lets you do all that, true; but it
          also eliminates your having to worry about how many words fit on
          a line and where to hyphenate words, how many lines fit on a
          page, counting over spaces when writing in columns, setting
          margins, and so forth. One of the nicest features of word
          processing is this: the computer "wraps" words around lines for
          you, knows when to go to the next page, and even keeps track of
          the number of pages in a document.
               Let's take an example using the sentence we just wrote in
          our "practice" file.  At last check, our cursor was at column 56,
          or the fifty-sixth position on the line.  And remember that the
          Braille 'n Speak defines a line as containing everything between
          one carriage return and the next.  But anyone who reads and
          writes braille knows that the largest braille page can only
          accommodate at most forty characters on a line.  When you print
          this file, the Braille 'n Speak knows how long to make each line
          because you will tell it with settings you control from the
          Status menu.  (We'll show you more about that later.)  The point
          is that you don't have to know where you are on a line as you're
          going along writing text.  No bell goes off when you've reached a
          certain point on a line to warn you to go to the next line.
          Nothing alerts you that you're at the bottom of a page and had
          better take this one out and start on a fresh page.
               So how do you start on a new page, even if you've only
          written a few lines on the current page?  How do you move down a
          couple of lines and indent to start a new paragraph?  That's
          where control characters come on the scene.  When the computer







          takes care of wrapping text from line to line and going from page
          to page, it is said to be doing "soft" carriage returns and page
          breaks. When you actually write a control character to force such
          an action, it is said to be a "hard" carriage return or a "hard"
          page break.
               A carriage return takes you back to the first physical
          position (or column) on a line - in other words, to the left
          margin.  You write a "hard" carriage return on the Braille 'n
          Speak by press ing a dots 4-6-chord.  Write a dots 4-6-chord now
          into your currently open file, "practice".  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "new line."  Now do a wh-sign-chord.  Notice that the
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Column 0; cursor at 58".  This is because
          a carriage return brings you back to the left margin of a line. 
          In other words, your cursor is now positioned at the beginning of
          a line, waiting for you to enter text.
               A linefeed by itself only moves you down one physical line
          but does not reposition you at the left margin of the line.  You
          don't need to write linefeeds into the Braille 'n Speak at all,
          since the Braille 'n Speak has a way of appending them for you.
          This only becomes important when you're sending a Braille 'n
          Speak file to a printer or transmitting it to your computer.  So
          we'll hold off on the discussion about how to append linefeeds
          until we talk about transmitting files in Chapter 4.
               A tab on the Braille 'n Speak moves you a certain number of
          spaces to the right on a line; you determine how many spaces.  To
          tab on the Braille 'n Speak press a dots 4-5-chord.  Try it now.
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "Column".  Write a "5" and remember to
          write in ASCII notation (a dropped e).  Press an e-chord to exe
          cute the command.  Now press a wh-sign-chord.  The Braille 'n
          Speak says, "Column 4; cursor at 62".  In other words, the
          Braille 'n Speak spaced over to the fifth position from the left
          margin and placed the cursor there for you to write something.
          Check this out by pressing dot 3-chords to move the cursor back a
          character at a time until you hear "return" when the cursor lands
          on the carriage return we wrote before.
               Now write, "Hello." and press a dots 4-6-chord to issue
          another carriage return.  But wait.  Don't we have to move the
          cursor forward to the end of the file, to where we had previously
          tabbed?
               No.  The Braille 'n Speak protects you from overwriting
          text.  No matter where you last read in your file, when you write
          some thing, the Braille 'n Speak jumps to the end of the file and
          appends to it.  So the "H" of the word "Hello." and carriage
          return we just wrote is automatically placed on the fifth posi
          tion of the line, just where we stopped when we tabbed before.
               A formfeed or "hard" page break control character forces
          your printer to go to the next physical page.  This means that if
          you decide that you want to start writing on a new physical page
          (not Braille 'n Speak "page"), you can write a control character,
          so that when you print the file, text following the formfeed
          charac ter will be printed on the next physical page.  To write a
          formfeed, press an x-chord. The Braille 'n Speak does not prompt
          you at this point. Now write a letter l.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Control l".  You have written a "hard" page break into







          your file.  Now write, "This is Page 2." followed by a carriage
          return.
               By the way, you write most control characters in the Braille
          'n Speak  with an x-chord followed by a letter.  Carriage returns
          and tabs are so commonly used that a single-key chord is provided
          for them.  Later, when we talk about how to prepare a file for
          printing, we'll get into more specifics about page length, line
          length, and so on.  All of those parameters, and more, can be
          adjusted as you need them on the fly.
               2.3.7 Selecting your Writing Mode
               By this time you may be wondering how to write so that each
          character isn't spoken back to you as you braille.  Let's show
          you a couple of options.
               You can have each word spoken as you complete brailling it
          instead of hearing each character spoken as you braille it. Also,
          you can have the keys click as you braille, or you can have a
          totally silent keyboard as you braille.
               Get into the Speech Parameters menu with an ar-sign-chord. 
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "Speech parameters".  Press the
          spacebar. The Braille 'n Speak says, "Key Click on".  Press an
          e-chord. The Braille and Speak says, "Exit".  Now try writing
          something in your file.  You'll hear a short click each time you
          press a key and the characters are no longer spoken as you
          braille.
               Enter the Speech Parameters menu again and press the
          spacebar. The Braille 'n Speak says, "Silent keys".  Exit the
          Speech Parameters menu and write something in your file.  Notice
          that the Braille 'n Speak is totally silent as you write.
               While having a totally silent keyboard may be great in a
          meeting, you may want some feedback about what you're writing. 
          Of course, you could always read what you have written in the
          usual manner, with current line or sentence commands, and so on. 
          But you might find it convenient to hear words spoken as you
          braille them into your file.  Press a g-chord from anywhere in
          your file.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Interactive, okay".  Try
          writing some thing.  Words are now spoken as you braille.  You
          can turn this feature off again simply by issuing another
          g-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Off, okay".  Try writing in
          both modes to find the one that is most comfortable for you.
               Earlier we said that "no bell goes off to tell you that
          you're at the end of a line ..." when you're writing in the
          Braille 'n Speak.  While this is true when you take the machine
          out of the box for the first time, you can change this setting.
               Get into the Status menu with an st-sign-chord and write a
          q. The Braille 'n Speak prompts, "Beep at column, 0".  You can
          change the setting to the position on the line where you want to
          be alerted as you write.  Remember to use dropped numbers.  Enter
          the change with an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak repeats your
          change to you.  Exit the Status menu with another e-chord.  From
          then on, as you write, you'll hear a distinct "plink" as you pass
          over that position on a line.
               Finally, you may be more interested in tracking what you're
          reading than what you're writing in a file.  For example, if you
          have a set of notes in the Braille 'n Speak to which you're







          responding, you might want to write your comments at the end of
          the file but not lose your place as your reading the notes.  In
          such a scenario, you want the cursor not to track what you are
          writing.
               Turn cursor tracking off from either the Status menu or the
          parameters menu.  Enter the Status menu with an st-sign-chord and
          write a c.  You hear, "Cursor tracking, on".  Respond with an n
          and exit the Status menu with an e-chord.  From now on, what you
          write is appended to the end of your file as always, but you'll
          be able to continue reading elsewhere in the file.
               Turn cursor tracking back on by re-entering the Status menu
          and responding with a y to the prompt, or simply enter the
          Parameters menu with a p-chord and write a c.  At the prompt,
          "Cursor track ing, enter y or n", write a y  The Braille 'n Speak
          confirms, "Okay" to once again track what you are writing.
               Practice writing.  Don't worry about braille mistakes for
          now. We can fix them, as you'll see in the next section.
               2.4 EDITING TEXT 
               Like any good word processor, the Braille 'n Speak lets you
          revise what you have written.  You can overwrite text already
          written, insert new text in between existing groups of text, even
          delete text you no longer want.  The Braille 'n Speak takes care
          of moving text aside to make room for new text you're inserting
          and it squeezes things back together again should you decide to
          get rid of some text.  And, as we alluded to earlier, it takes
          care of reformatting your pages so that the layout of your text
          still looks fine when you print.
               First, let's try overwriting some text.
               2.4.1 Overwriting a Character
               When you're writing in the Braille 'n Speak, you are always
          appending text to the end of the file unless you specifically
          invoke the Insert or Overwrite commands.  The Braille 'n Speak
          lets you overwrite only one character at a time.  To do this, you
          need to move your cursor onto a character you want to overwrite.
               Write a couple of carriage returns to separate this practice
          sec tion from your previous one.  Then write the words, "Today it
          is warm.", remembering to write in Grade 2 braille.  Now move
          your cursor back to the second character of the word "today". 
          The best way is probably to move back a word at a time with dot
          2-chords until the Braille 'n Speak says the word "it".  Press a
          dot 3-6-chord to see what character you're on.  It should be the
          "x" that represents the word "it" in Grade 2  braille.  Now press
          a dot 3-chord twice to position your cursor on the d of "td",
          which in Grade 2 braille represents the word "today".
               We're going to change the "today" to "tonight" by
          overwriting the d with an n.  Press an ow-sign-chord (dots
          2-4-6).  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Overwrite".  Write the
          letter n.  That's all. Now read the current word with a dots
          2-5-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak should say, "Tonight".
               In Chapter 3 we'll show you how to overwrite more than one
          character at a time using a "macro".  But for now, when you wish
          to overwrite a character, stick to the procedure just described.
               2.4.2 Backspacing and Rubbing Out a Character
               Now write the word "file".  Recall that the Braille 'n Speak







          takes you forward to the end of the file and what you write gets
          appended to the last character in your file.  So, in the present
          example, since the last word we had written was "warm.", this
          means that we've just added the word "file" right after the
          period of the previous sentence.  That won't do at all.
               We could simply delete this last word "file", couldn't we? 
          Well, not the way it is now, we couldn't.  It's attached to the
          previ ous word.  The Braille 'n Speak isn't smart enough to know
          that "warm.file" is two words separated by a period.  That's our
          mis take.  We'd better delete this word "file" by backspacing
          over each character and deleting it as we backspace.  To do this,
          make sure that you're at the end of the file with a dots
          4-5-6-chord. Then press a b-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak does not
          say anything but check out what the current character is with a
          dot 3-6-chord. The Braille 'n Speak should say, "l".  That means
          that it back spaced over and erased the e in "file" and the
          cursor is now on the l.  Press three more b-chords and then a
          dots 3-6-chord. The Braille 'n Speak should now say, "low d". 
          That of course is the Grade 2 braille sign for period.  Try
          backspacing over a few more characters, putting some back and
          backspacing over them again, maybe even overwriting some of them.
               Our next challenge is deleting text.  So let's move along.
               2.4.3 Deleting Text
               You can delete blocks of text regardless of where the text
          may be located.  The Braille 'n Speak lets you delete one or more
          chunks of text at a time.  You can throw away characters, words,
          lines or sentences, and paragraphs.  You can even delete from the
          current cursor location to the end of the file or empty out the
          file completely by deleting its entire contents.  Careful with
          that.
               The text you delete from your file goes into a temporary
          trash can (the Clipboard file we talked about earlier, remember)? 
          But that trash can is always being emptied out so you may not
          always be able to retrieve something from it if you change your
          mind. We'll talk about how to recover data in general in Appendix
          A "Troubleshooting".  Right now, let's look at how to delete text
          within our currently open file, "practice".
               Since deleting text can be a tricky business, the Braille 'n
          Speak makes you work a little when you want to delete something.
          To delete text, you must first move your cursor onto the text you
          want to delete.  You don't have to be at the beginning of the
          text you want to delete.  But you do need to be very clear about
          how much text you want to delete.  You then need to enter the
          "Delete Parameters" menu.
               Let's start by moving to the top of our file with an
          l-chord. Now read the current line with a c-chord.  It should
          say, "This is a practice file to learn how to write in the
          Braille 'n Speak."  Find out where the cursor is with a wh-sign-
          chord.  The Braille 'n Speak should say, "Column 0, cursor at 1". 
          Now enter the Delete Parameters menu with a d-chord.  The Braille
          'n Speak says, "Enter delete parameter".  Let's write a c (for
          character). In other words, we're telling the Braille 'n Speak
          that we want to delete a character - not a word, not a sentence,
          a character. When we write the c, the Braille 'n Speak says,







          "Character". It's now waiting for us to tell it how many
          characters we want to delete.  If we only want to get rid of one
          character, the one currently under the cursor (which happens to
          be the dot 6 that capitalizes the word "this" in our text), all
          we have to do at this point is press an e-chord.  The Braille 'n
          Speak will assume that we meant to delete only the character
          under the cursor.  Try that now.  Press an e-chord.  Press a dots
          3-6-chord to read the character under the cursor.  The Braille 'n
          Speak says, "th". That means that it worked.  We deleted the dot
          6 capitalizing the word "this".
               Now let's suppose we want to delete a few words.  We want to
          get rid of the words "this is a".  So let's re-enter the Delete
          Parameters menu with a d-chord and at the prompt, "Enter delete
          parameter", let's write a w.  This time, however, when the
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Word", let's write a 3 (remember to write
          an ASCII 3, a dropped c) and press an e-chord.  Now do a dots 3-
          6-chord to see what character the cursor is on.  The Braille 'n
          Speak says, "p".  Press a dots 2-5-chord to read the current
          word.   The cursor is on the p of the word "practice".
               To delete lines, at the prompt, "Enter delete parameter",
          write an l.  To delete sentences, write an s.  To delete
          paragraphs, write a p.  (And remember that the Braille 'n Speak
          thinks of a paragraph as all text between two or more carriage
          returns.)
               All of these parameters work the same way as outlined above
          in the examples of deleting a character and deleting words.  In
          summary, to delete a single chunk of text, you place your cursor
          somewhere within the text you want to delete, enter the Delete
          Parameters menu with a d-chord, write the appropriate parameter -
          for character, word, line, sentence or paragraph - and press an
          e-chord.  To delete groups of characters, words, lines, sentences
          and paragraphs, you need to follow the parameter letter designa
          tion with a number, and then press an e-chord.
               Incidentally, when deleting sentences, you don't have to be
          in Read by Sentence mode.  However, when you delete lines, it's a
          good idea to be in Read by Lines mode - to be on the safe side.
               Oops, we changed our minds and don't want to delete anything
          after all.  Or, we do want to delete something but realize we
          haven't placed the cursor on the text we want to delete and we've
          already pressed a d-chord.
               The easiest way to abort a delete command is to press a
          z-chord from wherever you are in the deleting process.  Of
          course, once you've pressed an e-chord, it's too late.  The
          Braille 'n Speak has executed your delete command.  As mentioned
          earlier, you might be able to recover from such a mistake if you
          move fast. But we won't complicate matters here with that
          procedure.  Just know that you might be able to retrieve text out
          of the trash can if you haven't closed the lid yet, so to speak. 
          Pressing the z-chord has that effect.
               What if we want to delete everything from the current cursor
          location to the end of the file?  Or, let's say that we want to
          wipe out the contents of this file - sort of like erasing a
          blackboard.  Understand that we're not talking about deleting the
          file itself here - just its contents or everything from a certain







          point in the file to the end of the file.
               To delete "all" text from the current cursor position
          forward, wherever you are in your file, enter the Delete
          Parameters menu in the usual way with a d-chord.  Let's go
          through an example.
               Get to the physical Page 2 that we created a little while
          ago. We'll erase everything that's on that page.
               First, get to the top of the file with an l-chord so that
          we're all starting from the same place.  Find the "hard" page
          break control character.  Remember how to use the Find command
          and how to write control characters?  Press an f-chord.  At the
          prompt, "Enter text to find", press an x-chord followed by an l. 
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "Control l".  Then press an e-chord. 
          The Braille 'n Speak should say, "This is Page 2."  Yes, that's
          what we had written after that control-l.  Good.  Let's get rid
          of the junk that we wrote for practice on Page 2.
               Check what's under the cursor first, though.  Press a
          current character chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Control l". 
          Do we want to get rid of the formfeed character?  No.  We still
          want to have a physical Page 2.  We just want to get rid of all
          the text on it.  So let's move a character to the right with a
          dot 6- chord.  Now we should be on the dot 6 of the first word
          after the control l.  Enter the Delete Parameters menu with a
          d-chord. When the Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter delete
          parameter", write a z.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "All".  Press
          an e-chord.  Now the Braille 'n Speak says, "Okay."  Where's the
          cursor?  Check it out with a dots 3-6-chord.  It should be on the
          control l.
               We suggest that you practice deleting text for a bit.  Write
          some junk text into this practice file.  Then move your cursor to
          various places within the file and delete different portions of
          text.  Write a couple of sentences and get into "Read by Sen
          tence" mode.  Then delete a sentence.  Try deleting the entire
          contents of the file, too.  After all, this is only a practice
          file.  You can't lose any really important data here.
               Next, we're going to look at inserting text.  So we'll
          assume that you're starting with a blank practice file again. 
          Remember, to delete all the text in your file, simply move the
          cursor back to the beginning of the file and use the z parameter
          in the Delete Parameters menu.
               Now let's check out how to insert text in your file.
               2.4.4 Inserting Text
               As we have pointed out, when you write in your file, text is
          appended to the end of the file unless you specifically issue a
          command to overwrite existing text or to insert text prior to the
          end of the file.
               You can insert up to 255 characters at one time anywhere in
          your currently open file.  When you issue the Insert command, you
          enter an "Insert buffer" - a scratchpad of sorts.  Text is not
          actually entered into your file until you press an e-chord.  If
          you decide to cancel the insertion, you can press a z-chord at
          any time and no text is inserted into your file.  While in the
          schratchpad, you can use the backspace (b-chord) to erase charac
          ters, just as you can when you're writing).  And you can see what







          you've written thus far by pressing a c-chord.  Let's go through
          an example.
               First, let's write a sentence in our empty file, "practice".
          Make sure that you're at the top of the file with an l-chord and
          that it is empty with a c-chord.  If the file is empty, when you
          press a c-chord you will hear, "File is empty".
               Write, "This is a practice session on how to insert text
          into a file."  Let's add the word "learning" before the word
          "how" to make the sentence read better.  Move your cursor back to
          the word "how" by pressing dot 2-chords until the Braille 'n
          Speak says, "how".  Press a dots 3-6-chord to see where the
          cursor is.  It should be on the "h" of "how".  Now press an
          i-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Insert mode active".  Write
          the word "learning" followed by a space, then press an e-chord to
          let the Braille 'n Speak insert the text.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Okay."
               Now check where your cursor is.  It should be on the space,
          the last character you inserted.  Read the entire sentence with a
          c-chord.  It now says, "This is a practice session on learning
          how to insert text into a file."
               Later, you'll see how easy it is to insert calculation
          results or calendar information into your file without retyping
          it.  We'll discuss those more sophisticated features in their
          respective sections in Chapter 3.
               Practice writing text and inserting things within it,
          deleting text, etc.  Get comfortable with these word processing
          basics before you move on to the next section on "cutting and
          pasting" text.
               2.4.5 Copying Text into Your File
               The Clipboard is not only a trash can for text you've thrown
          away.  It can also be a temporary storage area for text you want
          to copy from one place to another in your file, or text you want
          to move from one place to another in your file, or even text you
          want to copy or move between files.  For now, we'll look at
          copying and moving text within our currently open file, "prac
          tice".
               When you're going to copy or move a chunk of text, you must
          first mark one end of it.  Then you can work with the block of
          text preceeding or following the mark.
               Start out with a clean slate.  Empty out your file of any
          prac tice data you have in it and write the sentence, "This is a
          practice session on learning how to copy text into a file."  Fol
          low this sentence with two carriage returns to prepare us for a
          new paragraph.
               Now let's copy the text, "This is a practice session ",
          including the space after the word "session".  We'll put it after
          the two carriage returns.  To do this, find the beginning of the
          text we want to copy.  In this case, it's easy.  Simply go to the
          top of the file with an l-chord.  To mark the beginning of the
          text, press an m-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Marked,
          okay." Now move your cursor forward with dot 5-chords until
          you're on the word "on".  Essentially, what we're doing is
          marking the beginning of the text we want to work with and
          marking its end by placing the cursor where we want to stop.  To







          copy this marked text into the Clipboard, press a gh-sign-chord
          (dots 1-2-6).  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Copied."  If we went
          to the file called Clipboard now we'd see that our marked text,
          "This is a practice session ", is stored there.
               Let's copy this marked text.  By the way, notice that the
          text is not removed from your file.  If you press a c-chord, you
          will hear, "This is a practice session on learning how to copy
          text into a file."  Press a dots 4-5-6-chord to get to the end of
          the file.  Then press an ing-sign-chord (dots 3-4-6).
               Here we have some differences between the 640 and the
          Classic. The 640 says, "Paste what?" while the Classic simply
          says, "Okay" and copies the text from the Clipboard into your
          file.  This is because in the 640, you can choose to paste other
          information than that stored in the Clipboard.  If you're using
          the 640, you must respond to the prompt "Paste what?", in this
          case with a c (for Clipboard).  If Interactive mode is on, the
          640 says, "This is a practice session, okay".  If Interactive
          mode is off, it just says, "Clipboard, okay".
               Where is the cursor?  With a dots 3-6-chord you'll see that
          the cursor is on the dot 6 of the word "This".
               But wait a minute?  Didn't we say earlier that the Braille
          'n Speak always appends text to the end of the file?  Why did we
          have to do a dots 4-5-6-chord to get to the end of the file
          before copying the text from the Clipboard?  Let's find out.
               Go back to the top of the file with an l-chord.  Press an
          ing- sign-chord (and if using a 640, write a c).  Now read the
          current line.  We think you'll hear, "This is a practice session 
          This is a practice session on learning how to copy text into a
          file." What happened?  The Braille 'n Speak inserted the text
          where your cursor was, not at the end of the file.  Text gets
          appended to the end of the file only when you are writing it, not
          when you're copying it.  What a mess we have.  Let's get rid of
          this extra garbage before we get thoroughly mixed up.
               2.4.6 Deleting Marked Text from a File
               Just as we mark text for copying, we can mark it for
          deletion and work with the block of text preceeding or following
          the mark.
               Get to the top of the file with an l-chord and press an
          m-chord. The Braille 'n Speak says, "Marked, okay."  Now move the
          cursor to the second occurrence of the word "This".  Enter the
          Delete Parameters menu with a d-chord.  At the prompt, "Enter
          delete parameter", write an m.  The Braille 'n Speak confirms,
          "Mark". Enter an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Okay.". 
          Now read the current line.  You'll hear, "This is a practice
          session on learning how to copy text into a file."  Whew!  That
          extra text is gone.
               We suggest that you practice with the concepts of copying
          text from one place to another and deleting marked text from your
          file.  In the next section, you'll discover how to manipulate
          files themselves.  But before you tackle that, get real comfort
          able with all of the concepts discussed so far in this chapter.
          We've covered a lot of ground.
               2.5 MANIPULATING FILES
               As you've seen, the Braille 'n Speak lets you create files







          to en ter your personal data.  Soon you'll have many files in
          your Braille 'n Speak and will need to do things like rename
          them, change their size, and simply open them to read and write
          in them.  You might want to look at a list of your files, delete
          ones you no longer need and create new ones.  All of these
          options are handled through the Files Menu.
               Let's use our currently open "practice" file as a starting
          point to explore the Files Menu.
               What's the name of the currently open file?  When we turn
          the Braille 'n Speak on, we hear, "Braille 'n Speak Ready,
          filename is open".  Recall that the Braille 'n Speak remembers
          what file you were in and where your cursor was within that file
          the last time you turned it off.  So when you turn the Braille 'n
          Speak on again, the announcement of the name of the currently
          open file is very helpful.
               But what if you're working in a file and get interrupted by
          a long phone call, or if you can't remember what file you were
          working in before lunch (and you forgot to turn the Braille 'n
          Speak off).  Hopefully, you weren't running on battery, wasting
          valuable battery time.  But regardless of the circumstances, you
          want to find out the name of the currently open file.
               You could press a z-chord (normally used to abort commands)
          from anywhere within your currently open file to hear its name,
          size and whether braille translation is on for this file.  But
          since we're concentrating on the Files menu options in this
          section, let's see how to find out its name from there.
               Enter the Files menu.  Remember how we did this before to
          create our "practice" file?  First, enter the Options menu with
          an o-chord and the Braille 'n Speak says, "Option".  Then write
          an f and the Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter file command".  Write
          a t and we hear "practice, one page, braille file is open; enter
          file command."
               This tells us that the currently open file where we can read
          and write data is our "practice" file, that it is one Braille 'n
          Speak "page" in size,  and that it is a "braille" or Grade 2
          file.  In other words, the Braille 'n Speak is reminding us that
          braille translation is "on".  Finally, the Braille 'n Speak is
          providing us with the Files menu prompt again, "Enter file com
          mand".
               To get back into our file wherever we left off, all we have
          to do is exit the Files Menu with a letter e.  Notice that you
          don't have to press an e-chord, just an e.  "Exit" is one of the
          choices on the Files menu.  Any time you want to exit the Files
          menu to return to your currently open file, simply write an e and
          the Braille 'n Speak says, "Exit".  (By the way, pressing an e-
          chord or a z-chord also exits the Files menu.)
               Right now you should have very few files in your Braille 'n
          Speak: some from the factory and the "practice" file we have
          created.  But as we keep stressing, it won't be long before you
          have many files in your Braille 'n Speak.  So let's see how to
          get a listing of the files you have and how to move from file to
          file.
               2.5.1 Getting a List of Existing Files
               Note: In both models of the Braille 'n Speak you can check







          out your existing list of files from the Files menu by writing
          the letter l.  But in the 640, you can also get a "quick" list
          (just the filenames) by writing a q or a "verbose" list (with all
          relevant file information about each file spoken) by writing a v
          from the Files menu.  We'll emphasize the letter l option here
          since both models provide that command.
               Let's check out how many files we have.  You should be in
          your "practice" file.  It doesn't matter what text you have in it
          right now.  We'll just assume that you're starting from there.
          Get into the Files menu with an o-chord followed by the letter f.
          At the prompt "Enter file command", write an l.  The Braille 'n
          Speak should say something like this: "File list; Help, 3 pages;
          Clipboard, 1 page; Calendar, 1 page, braille file; 43 pages
          remaining (or 154 pages remaining, for the 640).  Enter file
          command."  The number of "pages" remaining varies with the model
          of the Braille 'n Speak you have, of course, and also depends on
          the sizes of your files.  This is just an example.  Notice that
          the list ends with, "Enter file command."  Let's check that our
          "practice" file is still the currently open file with a t.  The
          Braille 'n Speak should say, "practice, one page,  is open,
          braille file. Enter file command."
               For practice purposes, let's create a couple of new files
          before we look at how to move from file to file.  Create a file
          called "temp" for "temporary" and another called "names".  We'll
          use the "names" file as an address book later on.  We'll walk you
          through creating the "temp" file and let you create "names" by
          yourself.
               To create the file "temp", press an o-chord and at the
          "Option" prompt, write an f to enter the Files menu.  At the
          prompt "Enter file command", write a c.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Enter file to create."  Write "temp" and press an e-chord. 
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter the file size".  Let's make
          this a file with two Braille 'n Speak "pages" so that we can play
          with the size of this "temp" file later.  Write a 2 (dropped b)
          and press an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak now says, "Use Grade
          2 translator, enter y or n".  Write a y.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "temp now open."
               Go ahead and create the "names" file.  You'll be in that
          file ready to write something when you finish creating it.  If
          you like, you may enter a few names and addresses, phone numbers,
          etc.  A good idea is to write a single carriage return between
          each part of an entry and a double carriage return between en
          tries.
               For example, "Jane Doe, carriage return, 1600 Pennsylvania
          Ave. carriage return, Washington, DC, double carriage return;
          John Doe, single carriage return, 555-1234, double carriage
          return ..."  This way, you can move from entry to entry by simply
          pressing dots 5-6-chords to move forward or dots 2-3-chords to
          move backwards.
               We'll assume that you're in the file "names" as we proceed
          with our next topic, showing you how to move from file to file.
               2.5.2 Navigating Through Your Files
               Now let's explore moving from the beginning to the end of
          our ex isting files, checking out the names of each file along







          the way. We know how to get a list of all the files, but how do
          we quickly find the first file, or the last one or one somewhere
          in the mid dle.  Each file in the Braille 'n Speak is numbered,
          starting with 0 for the Help file.  Moving to a file does not
          mean that you can read it or write in it.  All we're doing is
          "pointing" to files - physically moving to the place in the
          Braille 'n Speak's memory where the file is located, something
          like finding the "tab" in our "binder" of files.  When you find a
          tab, you check out its name and either turn to the pages within
          it or you move to the next tab, or the previous one, or skip to
          the last one or the first one in your binder.  That's all we're
          doing here.
               To move from file to file, get into the Files menu with an
          o-chord followed by an f.  At the "Enter file command" prompt,
          you can do the following:
               To move to the first file, write an l-chord.
               To move to the last file, press a dots 4-5-6-chord.
               To move back one file from where you are presently, press a
          dot 1-chord and to move to the one following where you are
          presently, press a dot 4-chord.
               To see the name of the file you're currently pointing to,
          press a c-chord.
               To spell out the name of the file you're pointing to, press
          a dots 2-5-chord.
               Does anything sound familiar in these commands?  They sound
          suspiciously similar to the commands for navigating around a
          currently open file - finding the top of a file with an l-chord,
          reading the current line with a c-chord, spelling the current
          word with a dots 2-5-chord.  You can memorize the commands to
          move from file to file quickly by remembering how similar they
          are to the ones you already know.  The major difference is that
          these commands used within the Files menu point to files (reading
          you their names, how big they are, and whether they have braille
          translation active).  The commands you already know take you from
          place to place within your currently open file.
               Let's practice.  (We'll use the 640 file list as an example.
          With the Classic, you'll hear some slight differences: the Help
          file is shorter and there is no calendar file.)  From your
          currently open file, "names", press an o-chord followed by an f
          to get the prompt, "Enter file command".  Now press an l-chord.
          The Braille 'n Speak should say something like, "File number 0,
          Help, 3 pages."
               Now press a dot 4-chord to hear, "Clipboard, 1 page." Press
          another dot 4-chord to hear, "Calendar, 1 page, braille file."
          Press a dot 1-chord to go back a file and hear, "Clipboard, 1
          page." Press a dots 2-5-chord to hear the name of this file
          spelled out, "File number 1, Clipboard, c l i p b o a r d, 1
          page."
               Just for fun, let's see what happens when you write a t. 
          (Maybe you can't remember which file you last opened.)  The
          Braille 'n Speak should say, "names, 1 page, is open, braille
          file.  Enter file command."  Now press a c-chord. The Braille 'n
          Speak says, "Clipboard, 1 page." Why?  Even though our currently
          open file is "names", we're looking at the "tab" for the file







          called "Clip board".  See the difference?  The file we're
          pointing to may not be the one that's open.  If we want to open
          the file we're pointing to, we have to tell the Braille 'n Speak
          to open that file with an o-chord.
               Knowing whether the file you're pointing to in the Files
          menu is currently open is crucial.  Basically, a command that
          affects a file issued from within the Files menu can be invoked
          in one of two ways:  if the file you want to affect is already
          open, you issue a command to affect it by writing the first
          letter of the command (for example, r for Rename).  But if the
          file you want to affect is not open, you must point to it first
          and issue the command from the Files menu with its corresponding
          letter-chord command (for example, an r-chord for Rename).
               Let's look at how to open a file next.
               2.5.3 Opening an Existing File
               So we're moving along, checking the names of our files and
          run across the one we want to open, even though we already have
          "names" open.  We stopped at "Clipboard".  That's not a good file
          to open because that's the Braille 'n Speaks trash can, scratch
          pad and temporary holding area.  Let's get back into our old
          "practice" file.  At the prompt "Enter file command", press a few
          dot 4-chords until you hear, "practice, 1 page, braille file."
          Press an o-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "practice now
          open".  We can go ahead and read or write here.  What happened to
          "names"?  How nice that the Braille 'n Speak took care of closing
          it and saving that file for us without our having to do anything.
          This is a departure from the usual procedures you follow with
          files on your standard personal computer.  The Braille 'n Speak
          is unique in that you never have to save a file - not when you go
          to open another file, not when you turn the unit off.
               Seems okay to open a file by moving to it as just described
          and opening it with an o-chord when you have just a few files. 
          But think about what it would be like to have thirty files and
          having to do that.  What's an easier way?
               If you know the name of the file you want to open, all you
          have to do is tell the Braille 'n Speak its name and the unit
          will find the file for you and open it.  You're in the file
          "practice" and want to go back to the file, "names".  Press an
          o-chord fol lowed by an f to get to the Files menu prompt, "Enter
          file command".  Then write the letter o.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Enter file to open".  Write out the name of the file and
          press an e-chord.  Almost instantaneously the Braille 'n Speak
          says, "names now open".
               For practice, try opening a file that doesn't exist.  At the
          prompt, "Enter file command", write "hello" and press an e-chord.
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "Can't find that file. Enter file
          command."  This means that the file doesn't exist or that you
          wrote an incorrect name.  If you really think you have a file by
          the name you wrote, it might be that you spelled it differently.
          So you can always list your files to check whether a file by the
          name even exists and if it seems to be there, then you can move
          around from file to file with dot 4-chords and dot 1-chords until
          you're pointing to it, then hear its correct spelling with a dots
          2-5-chord and then open it with an o-chord.







               And speaking of file names and how you spell them, take care
          how you name your files.  What do you think will happen if you
          name a file "Sharon" using Grade 2 braille?  The Braille 'n Speak
          will let you name your file that way.  It's not smart enough to
          know that you're writing Grade 2 braille when you're in the Files
          menu.  Braille translation works only from within a file.  What
          happens when a file called "Sharon" written in Grade 2 braille is
          pointed to, opened, appears as part of a file list, etc.?  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "comma percent greater on."  It sees the
          dot 6, the "sh" and "ar" signs all as ASCII symbols, not as
          contracted braille.  So we suggest that you always name your
          files using uncontracted braille.
               Oh, oh.  Did you use Grade 2 braille when you created
          "names"? If so, don't worry.  You'll see how to rename it
          shortly.  But first, let's check out another way to open files,
          using a short cut, numbers.
               2.5.4 Opening an Existing File by Its Number
               Did you notice when we moved from file to file that file
          numbers were spoken by the Braille 'n Speak as well as file
          names?  When we go to the beginning of the file list from the
          Files menu with an l-chord or to the end of the list with a dots
          4-5-6-chord and even when we press a c-chord to see the name of
          the file current ly being pointed to, the Braille 'n Speak always
          said something like, "File 0, Help, 3 pages".  This is because
          files in the Braille 'n Speak's memory are numbered sequentially. 
          You can have a maximum of 41 files in the Classic and 77 in the
          640, assuming that each file is only one Braille 'n Speak page
          long.
               Of course, the actual number varies with the sizes of files
          you have at any given time in the Braille 'n Speak.  If you have
          a file that has thirty Braille 'n Speak pages in it - a
          substantial size, by the way - chances are the total number of
          files you'll be able to fit in the Braille 'n Speak will be far
          less than the upper limits we provide here.  We suggest that you
          create small files and add Braille 'n Speak "pages" to them as
          needed rather than have valuable space taken up with blank
          Braille 'n Speak "pages".
               But to get back to the original point of this section:  The
          Braille 'n Speak numbers files sequentially.  The Help file is 0,
          the Clipboard is 1, and so on.  If you frequently need to get
          into a certain file, instead of using the methods we described
          above for opening an existing file, you could open the file by
          its number.  Let's look at an example.
               Get into the Help file from whatever file you're in right
          now. What's the easiest way, remember?  Press a th-sign-chord and
          the Braille 'n Speak jumps into the Help file with the prompt,
          "Help is open".  For example, let's say that you want to get into
          the fifth file on your Braille 'n Speak.  That should be the file
          we created a little while ago called "temp".  From the Help file,
          press an o-chord and you'll hear the prompt, "Option".  Now
          instead of getting into the Files menu as we've been doing,
          simply write 04, remembering to use dropped numbers.  (Why 04?
          The numbers of the files start with 0 for the Help file; there
          fore, the fifth file in the Braille 'n Speak is numbered 04.) The







          Braille 'n Speak says, "Temp now open."  It's that easy.  You
          don't even have to press an e-chord.  In this case, the Braille
          'n Speak doesn't need it.
               What happens if you write the number for a nonexistent file,
          like 9 (given our present number of six files)?  No problem.  The
          Braille 'n Speak merely says, "File doesn't exist" and leaves you
          exactly where you were in your currently open file.  Of course,
          if you try to write the number in Grade 2 braille, the letter i,
          instead of the ASCII dropped i, the Braille 'n Speak will really
          reject your request, saying, "Invalid input" and still leave you
          exactly where you were in your currently open file.  The thing to
          be careful of in using the o-chord from within a file to get to
          the Options menu is that if you write a letter that the Braille
          'n Speak thinks of as a real option, like the letter f that we've
          been working with, it will take you to that option.  In the case
          of the letter f, we already know that; it's the Files menu.
               Now let's move forward with several housekeeping file
          commands.
               2.5.5 Renaming a File
               How about changing the name of our file called "temp" to
          "drill". We're just going to practice doing things to this file
          as if it had data, so we can play with it without danger of
          messing up anything important.
               We'll assume that your currently open file is "temp".  Let's
          enter the Files menu in the usual way with an o-chord followed by
          an f.  At the "Enter file command" prompt, write an r.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter filename".  Write the filename
          "drill" and press an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Okay,
          enter file command."
               Note that we're still in the Files Menu.  To get back into
          the currently open file, now called "drill", all we have to do is
          write an e to exit the Files menu.
               But what if you want to change the name of another file, one
          that is not currently open?  The first thing to do is to "point"
          to the file.  Remember how that's done?  Let's change the name of
          the file "names" to "address".  We don't have to open that file.
          We just have to point to it.  So from the Files menu, at the
          "Enter file command" prompt, press a couple of dot 4-chords until
          you're on "names".  Then press an r-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Enter file name".  Write "address" followed by an e-chord.
          The Braille 'n Speak now says, "Okay, enter file command" just as
          it did before.  Where will you be when you press the e to exit
          the Files menu?  Right.  Back in the file "drill" because that is
          the currently open file.
               Notice the difference in the two commands just discussed for
          renaming a file:  You issue the command with an r if the file is
          currently open and with an r-chord if you are pointing to the
          file but it is not currently open.  Keep this in mind as we move
          through the next few commands.  They work the same way.
               2.5.6 Write-Protecting and Unprotecting a File
               To guard against a serious blunder, such as accidentally
          deleting your address file, you can "protect" files from deletion
          or from being overwritten in some way.  For files that are
          absolutely essential, it is a good idea, especially if you want







          to try out a new command on the Braille 'n Speak that affects
          files (for example, changing its size).  Protecting a file is
          like putting a "lock" on it  in effect, safeguarding yourself
          against losing or scrambling its contents.
               Once again, the Protect and Unprotect commands work the same
          way as many other commands within the Files menu. If a file is
          already open, writing a p from the Files menu protects the file.
          If the file is not already open, point to it first, then issue a
          p-chord command to protect it.  The corresponding command pair is
          the letter u and u-chord for Unprotecting files.  Let's go
          through an example.
               Open your file called "drill", if you're not already in it. 
          Now get into the Files menu with an o-chord followed by an f.  At
          the "Enter file command" prompt, write a p.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, ""File is write-protected; enter file command."  Exit the
          Files menu with an e and try writing something in your "drill"
          file.
               Every time you write a character, the Braille 'n Speak says,
          "File is write-protected."  Oh, you can read the file just fine.
          But now you can't write anything in it.  In fact, our "drill"
          file has nothing in it right now anyway.  But if it did, you
          would only be able to read its contents, not write in the file.
               Let's protect our "address" file, shall we?  You wouldn't
          want to lose that.
               Get back into the Files menu with an o-chord followed by an
          f and at the "Enter file command" prompt, press some dot 4-chords
          and dot 1-chords until you're pointing to "address".  Now press a
          p-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "File is write-protected;
          enter file command".  Great.  Even though the "address" file is
          not currently open, we were able to protect it by pointing to it
          first and then issuing a p-chord.
               Now let's get back to our "drill" file and Unprotect it in
          case we want to write something in it or do something else with
          the file.  All you have to do is exit the Files menu with an e.
          Remember, you never opened your "address" file, just protected
          it.  So now you should be back in "drill".  Get to the Files menu
          and at the "Enter file command" prompt, write a u.  The Braille
          'n Speak says, "Unprotected; enter file command."  That's fine.
          Simply exit the Files menu with an e and write something in your
          "drill" file.  You should be able to do that with no hitches now
          that the file is unprotected again.
               Next, we'll see how to delete a file you no longer need.
               2.5.7 Deleting a File
               Let's delete the file called "drill".  After all, it's just
          a junk file we're using for practice.  We'll assume that you're
          currently in the "drill" file as we go through this example.
               Get into the Files menu and at the "Enter file command"
          prompt, write a d.  The Braille 'n Speak says, ""Enter file to
          delete". Write the name of the currently open file, "drill", and
          press an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says,  "Delete drill, are
          you sure; enter y or n?"  Press a y.  The Braille 'n Speak
          confirms, "Okay, Help now open; enter file command."
               Since you just deleted the file you had open, the Braille 'n
          Speak put you back into the Help file.  But now, let's look at a







          slightly different scenario where the file you want to delete is
          not the file that is currently open.  Let's get rid of our file,
          "practice".
               First, get into your file, "address".  It should still be
          pro tected from when we worked through that example.  Don't worry
          that you can't write in it for now.
               Get into the Files menu and at the "Enter file command"
          prompt, write a d.  At the prompt, "Enter file to delete", write
          "prac tice" followed by an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Delete practice, are you sure; enter y or n?"  Write a y.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Okay, enter file command."
               Where do you think you'll be when you exit the Files menu
          with an e?  Right.  Back in your "address" file.  Why?  Because
          the file you just deleted is not the file you had open.  So the
          Braille 'n Speak went out into the binder and found the file you
          wanted to delete, chucked it and returned you to your currently
          open file. It's like tossing something in the wastebasket under
          your desk.
               One more example of file deletion:  This time, let's look at
          what happens when we don't have a file open, but are pointing to
          a file we want to delete.  Open up the Help file with a th-sign-
          chord.  Get into the Files menu and at the prompt "Enter file
          command", use dot 4-chords till you reach the file "address".
          You're pointing to it, but it is not open.  Press a d-chord.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "File is write-protected".  Good.  Remem
          ber, we had protected the "address" file from just this kind of
          potential disaster?
               If the "address" file had not been protected, though, the
          Braille 'n Speak would still have a safeguard for you.  The
          prompt would have been, "Delete address, are you sure; enter y or
          n?"  All you'd have to do is write the letter n, and the Braille
          'n Speak would simply say, "Enter file command" and you'd still
          have the Help file open.
               The last thing we'll look at related to manipulating files
          is changing their size.  Let's play with this concept next.
               2.5.8 Changing the Size of a File
               Throughout this chapter we've talked a lot about  the
          Braille 'n Speak "page".  Let's briefly review this concept.
               A Braille 'n Speak "page" is really a block of Braille 'n
          Speak memory consisting of space equal to four thousand and
          ninety-six characters.  If you consider that a standard eleven by
          eleven- and-a-half inch piece of braille paper can hold a maximum
          of one thousand characters, you can see that four thousand and
          ninety- six is a lot.  It is like having four pieces of braille
          paper each filled with characters, every single cell.  And of
          course, that's not how braille pages are filled.  You have
          spaces, which by the way, are considered to be characters by
          computers, and you have blank lines for formatting purposes, etc. 
          Blank lines to a computer are expressed by the control characters
          we mentioned earlier, carriage returns and linefeeds.  Since the
          Braille 'n Speak's memory is not "pieces of paper", but instead,
          a continu ous space to be filled with characters, and since the
          Braille 'n Speak doesn't care whether those characters are text
          or control characters, the blocks of four thousand and ninety-six







          characters worth of memory called "pages" are hefty chunks of
          memory.
               Usually, when you create a Braille 'n Speak file it's a good
          idea to create it with only one "page".  Unless you know that
          you're going to be filling up the file very rapidly with data,
          why waste valuable Braille 'n Speak memory by creating a file
          that has many "pages"?
               But the time will no doubt come when you do need to add a
          "page" to an existing file.  The Braille 'n Speak lets you add
          space to a file, but only in chunks or "pages" of four thousand
          and ninety-six characters worth of space.  Let's see how this
          works.
               We're going to make our "address" file bigger.  Even though
          right now it's big enough, let's practice adding a "page" to it. 
          First we have to unprotect it because otherwise the Braille 'n
          Speak won't let us do anything to the file.
               Find the file "address" from your Files menu and open it. 
          Don't worry that the Braille 'n Speak tells you that the file is
          write- protected.  Get into the Files menu and Unprotect the
          "address" file with a u at the "Enter file command" prompt.  The
          Braille 'n Speak should say, "Unprotected; enter file command."
               Now just write an e to exit the Files menu and get back into
          your "address" file.  Check out how much room there is left in
          the file at this point with an r-chord.  It should be
          considerable, over thirty-five hundred characters worth, anyway,
          unless you have entered lots of names and addresses.  Under
          normal circum stances, we'd say, fine.  Leave the file as is and
          don't add to it.  But for practice, let's make the file bigger.
               Get into the Files menu and at the prompt, write a b.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter number of pages to expand."  Press
          an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Okay."  And where do you
          suppose you are?  Yes.  Right where you left off within your
          "address" file. The Braille 'n Speak simply gave you another
          "page" worth of memory and put you back where you were in the
          file.
               If you want to increase the size of your file by more than
          one page at once, you would answer the prompt with a dropped
          number, indicating how many extra pages you want.  But unless you
          know that you're going to be filling a file with a lot of data
          quickly - such as a file from your computer - it's probably
          better to increase pages one at a time so that you don't waste
          valuable Braille 'n Speak space.
               How much room do you have in the "address" file now?  Press
          an r- chord. The number should be well over eight thousand.
               Now let's return the "address" file to its original one-page
          size.  This is really too big for our purposes right now.  Get
          back into the Files menu and write an s at the "Enter file
          command" prompt.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter number of
          pages to subtract".  Press an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Okay" and once again leaves you back in your file, just
          where you had left off.
               As with increasing the number of pages, if you want to
          decrease the size of a file, writing a dropped number at the
          prompt indicating ho  many pages you no longer need removes them







          from the file.
               Incidentally, when the Braille 'n Speak adds or subtracts
          "pages" from your file, it's important for you to understand that
          the block being added or subtracted is being added to or
          subtracted from the end of your file.  You can't, for example, be
          five lines into a file, and decide that you want a blank chunk of
          space between where you are and the next block of text you
          already had in this file.  Or, that you have a chunk of text that
          you no longer want and therefore you'd like the Braille 'n Speak
          to subtract that block using the commands just described.  How do
          you add and delete text?  We covered that earlier.  You use the
          Insert command or the Delete command within your file for those
          kinds of activities.  The command described in the present
          section have to do with big chunks of Braille 'n Speak memory.
               Can you see how crucial it is to keep track of free space in
          a file and to know how many characters are actually in that file
          before removing pages from the end of your file?
               Just as with previous commands within the Files menu, you
          can make a file bigger or smaller, adding or subtracting Braille
          'n Speak "pages", when those files are not open.  As with other
          Files menu commands, you point to the file first and then issue a
          b-chord or s-chord (for bigger and smaller respectively) and
          follow the prompts to make the file being pointed to bigger or
          smaller.
               Practice with the commands we've gone over in these last few
          sections.  The only thing left to do in the present chapter is to
          find out how much room we have free in the Braille 'n Speak.
               2.5.9 Free Space in the Braille 'n Speak
               As you add and delete files and change their sizes, the
          amount of free space in the Braille 'n Speak varies.  From time
          to time it's good to check out just how much free space you do
          have left, especially if you're about to add a biggie.
               From the Files menu you can simply write an f at the "Enter
          file command" prompt and the Braille 'n Speak will tell you that
          you have x-number of "pages" left.  For example, it will say some
          thing like, "One hundred forty-five pages remaining; enter file
          command."  That's in the 640, of course.  The number of "pages"
          remaining in the Braille 'n Speak Classic should never be greater
          than forty-five "pages".
               2.6 SUMMARY
               We've covered a considerable number of ideas in this
          chapter. It's worth reviewing them until you're thoroughly
          comfortable with them.  There are other Files menu commands yet
          to examine. And, there are other things we can do within files:
          add a date from the calendar, or a calculation result from the
          calculator, figure out the number of physical braille or print
          pages that are in a file, etc.  We'll cover these sophisticated
          concepts in detail in the next two chapters.  We'll examine a
          bunch of very handy features the Braille 'n Speak provides for
          you.  Neverthe less, if you've mastered the concepts ub the
          present chapter, you're well on your way to making the Braille 'n
          Speak an indis pensable tool.







                         Chapter 3 - Working With Other Tools

               Now that you've mastered working with the most important
          feature of the Braille 'n Speak - reading and writing files -
          it's time to learn about the handy tools that are also available
          to you in the Braille 'n Speak.
               Think of the Braille 'n Speak as if it were your desktop,
          com plete with all the tools you usually find there: a notepad, a
          calendar, a calculator, a looseleaf binder, a clock, even a
          telephone.  (Well, the Braille 'n Speak isn't a telephone; but it
          does let you hook up to one.  We'll leave that for Chapter 4.)
          For now, we'll learn about the other tools that come already
          built into the Braille 'n Speak.
               In this chapter we'll discuss: the clock and the calendar,
          the stopwatch and the timer, the calculator, and a few of other
          handy features, including the macro and word-exceptions checker
          utili ties.  Some of the features we'll look at are unique to the
          640, and we'll point that out when we discuss them.  For the most
          part, the functions we'll see in this chapter are choices from
          the Options menu, just as we saw that the Files menu is a choice
          from the Options menu. So let's get started.
               3.1 THE CLOCK AND THE CALENDAR
               Note:  In the following discussion, unless otherwise
          indicated, features are available in both the Braille 'n Speak
          Classic and the 640.  However, most of the functions related to
          the calendar are only available in the 640.
               We all rely on our watches and the clocks and calendars on
          our office walls to keep us on track during the day.  The Braille
          'n Speak has both a built-in clock and calendar for your conve
          nience.  (The Classic only has the clock and today's date avail
          able.)  Not only can you use the clock to see what time it is
          right now and the calendar to check out how many days away you
          are from that long-awaited vacation, but also, the clock keeps
          track of the time and date when you created a file and the
          calendar can even "tickle" your memory to remind you when impor
          tant things are happening.
               Let's look at the clock first.
               3.1.1 The Clock
               The Braille 'n Speak's clock lets you do the things all
          clocks do.  You can check on the current time and you can set the
          time. You have a choice about whether to set the time in either
          Ameri can or European time.  With American time, hours are
          announced from one to twelve with a.m. or p.m.  With European
          time, hours are announced from zero to 23 and a.m. and p.m. are
          not spoken.
               If you have set punctuation announcement to Most Punctuation
          from the Speech Parameters menu, hours and minutes are announced
          sepa rated by the word "colon".  If you have it set to Some
          Punctua tion, time is announced just as a person might say it.
               First, let's check out what the Braille 'n Speak thinks is
          the current time.  We'll work with an example.  It's anybody's
          guess what your unit might be set to from the factory.
               Enter the Options menu from anywhere in your currently open
          file with an o-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Option". 







          Write a t.  The Braille 'n Speak says something like, "The time
          is 1 a.m.".  You'll still be right where you left off in your
          file.
               Now let's see the difference between American and European
          methods for announcing the time.  Press an o-chord and at the
          "Option" prompt, write the letter s.  The Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Set."  Now write an e.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "European
          time set."  Check the time with an o-chord t.  The Braille 'n
          Speak should now say something like, "The time is 1."  Notice
          that it did not tell you whether it's a.m. or p.m.  That's
          because we set the Braille 'n Speak to the European method of
          announcing the time.  When you're setting the time in this mode,
          you are not prompted for a.m. or p.m., of course, since you're on
          a 0 to 23 hour cycle.
               Let's return to the American method for announcing the time.
          Press an o-chord s and at the "Set." prompt, write an a.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "American time set".  For purposes of our
          example, we'll use this mode for announcing the time.
               Let's set the clock to the real time, shall we?  We'll use
          an arbitrary time here, but set your Braille 'n Speak to the real
          clock so that files you create will have accurate times associat
          ed with them.
               Press an o-chord and at the "Option" prompt, write an s
          followed immediately by a t, no spaces.   You're telling the
          Braille 'n Speak that you want to set the time.  The Braille 'n
          Speak prompts you with, "Enter time hh mm".
               Write something like, "1215" (remembering to use dropped num
          bers).  The Braille 'n Speak now says, "Enter a or p for a.m. or
          p.m."  Write p.  The Braille 'n Speak confirms, "The time is
          12:15 p.m.".
               Great.  Now we have the correct time.  But how about the
          date? Let's look at the calendar next.
               ** 3.1.2 The Calendar
               Note: This feature is unique to the 640, except for the
          ability to check today's date and insert it into a file, which is
          avail able in both models.
               The Braille 'n Speak's calendar runs like a clock in the
          sense that it automatically
               keeps pace with the clock as each new day arrives.  It's
          impor tant that the date be set correctly to maintain accuracy,
          of course.  The calendar has some great features which we'll
          examine in detail below.  For example, not only can you check
          today's date, but you can also check on what day of the week a
          certain date falls, go backward or forward a number of days to
          see what the date was or is going to be, insert a particular date
          in your personal calendar, and nicest of all, set the Braille 'n
          Speak to remind you when an important date on your personal
          calendar ar rives.
               3.1.2.1 Checking Today's Date3.1.2.1 Checking Today's Date
               Note: This feature is available in both models.
               To see today's date, simply press an o-chord d.   The
          Braille 'n Speak says something like, "The date is December 25,
          1992".  It should be set correctly from the factory but, like the
          clock, this is not always the case.  So let's look at how to set







          the date.
               3.1.2.2 Setting Today's Date3.1.2.2 Setting Today's Date
               Note: This feature is available in both models.
               To set the date, press an o-chord to get into the Options
          menu. Now write the letter s and the Braille 'n Speak responders
          with, "Set".  Write a letter d and the Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Enter date, mm/dd/yy".  Now write today's date using only
          numbers and no spaces and skipping the century, something like,
          "010193", and press an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak immediately
          responds, "The date is Friday January 1, 1993".  From now on, the
          Braille 'n Speak will count forward based on the current time and
          change dates as the clock cycles through each twenty-four hour
          period.
               But let's suppose that you want to check back on a date or
          you want to see on what day of the week a future date falls. 
          Since the Braille 'n Speak knows today's date, this process is
          quite simple for it to calculate for you.
               (Note: While the Classic can't tell you what day a certain
          date falls on like the 640 can, it does let you set the day of
          the week.  Enter an o-chord followed by the letters s w.  The
          Classic responds, "Enter a number for the day of the week." 
          Using dropped numbers, you can write numbers from 1 to 7 (Sunday
          being 1).  Thereafter, the Classic will track not only today's
          date, but what day of the week today is.  This is useful for
          pasting today's date into a calendar.)
               ** 3.1.2.3 Getting a Date from the Calendar** 3.1.2.3
          Getting a Date from the Calendar
               Note: This feature is unique to the model 640.
               Let's say that you want to know what day a certain date fell
          on because you think you have an extra charge from your
          hairdresser, who you visit only on Wednesdays.  We'll assume our
          sample date of December 25, 1992 as today's date.
               Press an o-chord for the Options menu.  Now write a letter g
          to "get a date" from the calendar.  The Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Enter number of days or a date mm/dd/yyyy".  Depending on what
          you enter, the Braille 'n Speak responds differently.
               First, what happens if you just pressed an e-chord?  Try it
          now. The Braille 'n Speak should say something like, "Day number
          360." Oh, it's telling us that today, (Christmas Day in our
          example) is the three hundred sixtieth day of the year.  That's a
          handy feature to have.  But let's continue with our example.
               Press an o-chord followed by a g again and at the prompt,
          "Enter number of days or a date mm/dd/yyyy", write "11251992" and
          press an e-chord.  Remember to write all the numbers in ASCII
          (dropped numbers) and without spaces.  The Braille 'n Speak
          should answer, "The date is Wednesday November 25, 1992."  Oh-oh. 
          Guess you did have an appointment that day.  Better pay this
          bill.
               What about if you know how many days away from today's date
          a date is and want to enter it into your calendar. Let's see
          another way to get a date from the calendar.
               Now let's suppose that you just got a call from your boss
          who wants to set up a meeting for the day before New Year's. 
          Have to go over those end-of-year budget figures one more time. 







          What a Scrooge calling on Christmas Day for such a thing.  Oh
          well. Better put it in the calendar.  Let's see. That makes it
          six days from today since New Year's Day falls exactly one week
          from Christmas Day.
               Press an o-chord g and at the prompt, "Enter number of days
          or a date mm/dd/yyyy", this time simply enter a dropped number 6
          and press an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak should say, "The date
          is Thursday December 31, 1992". 
               Incidentally, you can have the Braille 'n Speak count
          backward a number of days by preceding the number with a dash or
          minus sign (dots 3-6).  Sighing, you decide to enter this meeting
          into your personal calendar.
               3.1.2.4 Inserting a Date into Your Calendar3.1.2.4 Inserting
          a Date into Your Calendar
               Note: This feature is available in both models, but in the
          Classic, the only date you may insert into a personal calendar is
          today's date.
               The Braille 'n Speak 640 comes with a file called "calendar"
          (you might want to create one for yourself if you have the
          Classic). Let's get into that file now with an o-chord followed
          by the dropped digits 02. Assuming you have not deleted it, the
          calendar file set from the factory should be the third file in
          your Braille 'n Speak 640 and should be accessible as we've just
          described.  If you can't find it, if you have deleted it, or if
          you have the Classic Braille 'n Speak, then go ahead and create
          yourself a file called "calendar".
               With the file "calendar" open, let's insert this date for
          the meeting next week into the calendar before we forget.  Press
          an i-chord and at the "Insert" prompt, simply press an e-chord. 
          (If you're using a Classic and try this procedure, you'll be
          insert ing today's date into your file.)  Now read your current
          line. The Braille 'n Speak should say, "Thursday December 31,
          1992". It remembered the date you last accessed in its memory and
          conve niently placed it in your file without your having to write
          it. Now go ahead and press a dots 4-6-chord (a hard carriage
          return) and then write yourself a note about this silly meeting. 
          Could n't it wait till after the first of the year?  Oh well.
               To  insert today's date into your calendar, with your
          "calendar" file open, simply press an i-chord followed by an
          e-chord and today's date is pasted into your calendar file.
               A couple of words of caution:
               It's a good idea to enter three hard carriage returns (dots
          4-6- chords) between one date and the next on your calendar. 
          After each date, you'll want a carriage return followed by
          whatever notes you make to yourself about that date.  But after
          you finish making notes about a date, place three carriage
          returns.  This is because the Braille 'n Speak erases the last
          character you entered in your file when it inserts a date into
          your calendar and replaces it with a space.  The easiest way for
          you to avoid confusion is to place three carriage returns between
          dates.
               To move from date to date in your calendar then is very
          simple. You can move forward or backward through your calendar by
          press ing dots 5-6-chords or dots 2-3-chords (the next and







          previous paragraph commands respectively).
               The other important thing to keep in mind when inserting a
          date into a file is that the 640 remembers the last date it spoke
          to you.  Unless you have used the Insert command for something
          else, pressing an i-chord e-chord inserts that date into your
          file.  If you have used the Insert command for something else,
          pressing i- chord e-chord inserts today's date into your file. 
          On the other hand, the Classic remembers only today's date and so
          it can only insert today's date into your file when you press
          i-chord e- chord.
               A quick way to get today's date and/or time into a file in
          the 640 is with the ing-sign-chord (dots 3-4-6).  Recall that in
          Chapter 2 we talked about this command with regard to pasting
          text from the Clipboard.  In the 640 you can also use the ing-
          sign-chord to paste today's date or the present time into a file.
          Press ing-sign-chord and at the prompt "Paste what?", write a d
          (for date) or a t (for time).   The 640 pastes the information
          into your file and (if Interactive is on) speaks it to you after
          saying, "Okay".
               Practice the calendar commands before moving on to our next
          topic, (unique to the model 640), how to get the Braille 'n Speak
          to remind you of a date on your calendar.
               ** 3.1.2.5 Calendar Alert** 3.1.2.5 Calendar Alert
               Note: This feature is unique to the model 640.
               The Braille 'n Speak can be set to remind you of important
          dates you've written into your calendar file.  This is a feature
          that you can turn on and off through the Status menu.
               When Calendar Alert is activated, every time you turn on the
          Braille 'n Speak, if today's date is marked in your calendar
          file, the Braille 'n Speak warns you that you have something in
          your calendar for today and gives you a choice as to whether to
          look at it immediately.  Let's see how this works.
               To set up an example, let's enter today's date into our
          calendar file and make a note to ourselves.  Turn your Braille 'n
          Speak on and open the calendar file.  Now press an i-chord
          e-chord.  When you read the current line, you should see today's
          date (in our example, "Friday December 25, 1992").  Enter a
          carriage return followed by a note that says, "Today I am
          learning about the calendar."  Follow this with three carriage
          returns.
               Now enter the Status menu with an st-sign-chord (dots 3-4). 
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "Status menu".  Depending on where you
          were last within the Status menu, the Braille 'n Speak might say
          something in addition to this."  But let's just work with the
          simplest case.
               Write the letter j.  The Braille 'n Speak should tell you
          the status of calendar alert.  So it should say something like,
          "Calendar check off".  We want to activate it.  So write a y. The
          Braille 'n Speak should now say, "Calendar check on."  Exit the
          Status menu with an e-chord and turn the Braille 'n Speak off.
               Now turn the Braille 'n Speak on again and listen carefully
          to what it says.  You should hear something like, "Braille 'n
          Speak ready, Calendar alert.  Do you want to open the calendar. 
          Enter y or n?"  The Braille 'n Speak will not let you do anything







          else until you have responded to this prompt.  We'll write a y
          because we want to see what's so important about today in the
          calendar.
               The Braille 'n Speak says today's date and immediately
          places us in that point in the calendar.  If you check your
          current line, you'll see that it is right on today's date and the
          following line says what you wrote as a message about today. 
          Okay, you may go ahead and erase this if you like.  Or, if it's
          important for you to keep old calendar dates around for a time,
          you might want to keep it.  Just remember that for today at
          least, every time you turn on the Braille 'n Speak, you'll have
          to respond to this question about the calendar.  The Braille 'n
          Speak isn't smart enough to know that you've already checked the
          calendar once today.  Besides, you might just want to check it
          again later in the day to make sure you did everything you had
          written for today.
               Now let's suppose that you had answered with an n to the
          prompt, "Braille 'n Speak ready, calendar alert.  Enter y or n?" 
          In that case, the Braille 'n Speak would act as it always has in
          the past, placing you in the file where you last worked and with
          the cursor where you last had it.
               To turn the calendar alert feature off again, simply re-
          enter the Status menu with an st-sign-chord and write a j.  At
          the prompt "Calendar check on", write an n.  The Braille 'n Speak
          now says, "Calendar check off."  Press an e-chord to return to
          your cur rently open file.
               The Calendar Alert feature, when active, can be somewhat
          annoying if you have something in your calendar for today and
          you're constantly turning the Braille 'n Speak on and off.  But
          it's benefits far outweigh this small inconvenience.  And you can
          always turn it off temporarily.  We suggest that unless you're
          not going to be using a calendar very much, it's probably a good
          idea to activate the Calendar Alert feature.
               Even if you do have the Calendar Alert feature turned off,
          you can still check out whether you have something marked for
          today in your calendar, however.  Basically, this is a choice
          from the Options menu and works essentially the same way as we
          described a moment ago.
               Press an O-chord a (for alert) from anywhere within a file
          and you'll hear the familiar Calendar Alert prompt, "Calendar
          alert, do you want to open the calendar; enter y or n?"  Of
          course, you'll only hear this prompt if something is marked in
          the calendar file for today.  If not, nothing happens and you're
          right where you were in the file before you issued the O-chord a
          command.  You respond to the prompt just as we've described
          above.  This is a good alternative to having the calendar alert
          feature active from within the Status menu.
  You can also paste any date you wish by entering the 346  chord followed  by the letter G. Think of g for get date. Entering the 346 chord causes Braille 'n Speak to say "paste  what?" Press the letter G. You should hear "enter a number of days or a date, mmddyyyy". Does this sound familiar?  It's the same prompt that you hear when you activate the smart calendar.  As an example, let's say that you want to paste  the date January 20, 1993 into your calendar file. Enter 346 chord followed by the letter g. At the prompt  write 012093 followed by e chord. That date is now pasted in your file.  Now, suppose that you have pasted various  dates into your file, and you need to see if a specific date is there. There is an easy way to do this. Enter f chord  to find the date. Once you hear "enter text to find" write a g chord. You should hear the prompt asking for a number of days  or a date. This is the same prompt  that you hear when you activate the smart calendar. Now enter the date you wish to find.  To find January 20, 1993 write 012093 and then type e chord to search for the date in a forward direction, or you can  type dots 1456 chord to search for the date in a backward direction.' ** 3.1.3 Information About Your Files
               Note: This feature is unique to the 640.
               Before we leave the clock and the calendar utilities
          altogether, let's look at a very handy "side effect" of the
          built-in clock and calendar.  You might need to know the date on
          which you created a file.  Maybe you want to replace it with new
          content or delete the file altogether but you're not sure how old







          the file is.  Or maybe you have a backup of a file on a floppy
          disk and want to compare that file's date or size with that of a
          file on the Braille 'n Speak to see which is more current.
               Get into the Files menu in the usual way by pressing an
          o-chord f and at the "Enter file command" prompt, first write a t
          to see what file you currently have open.  For sample purposes
          through out this section, we'll say you have the Help file open. 
          Now press an i-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak should say something
          like, "Help 3 pages; Date 12/22/92; Time 10:38; 10,196 bytes;
          enter file command". 
               Not only do you get information about the exact date and
          time when this file was created, but you get the number of
          Braille 'n Speak pages in the file, how many "bytes" (characters)
          it con tains, and for files which are write-protected, you would
          get that information, too.  If the file were a braille file, that
          is, one where your text is in Grade 2 braille and the braille
          trans lator is on, you would also hear that information.
               Finally, if you want to use this feature for a file which is
          not currently open, from the Files menu simply write the letter
          i. The Braille 'n Speak  prompts you with, "Enter filename". 
          Write the name of the file you want to check and press an
          e-chord.  You immediately hear all relevant information for that
          file as in our example above, ending with the prompt, "Enter file
          command".  As always when leaving the Files menu, write an e to
          exit and return to your currently open file.
               What if you just want the time and date, or just the number
          of bytes in a file?  There are two options from the Files menu
          that can help: the "m" and "wh-sign" commands.  Let's check them
          out one at a time.
               To get the time and date when a file was created, from the
          Files menu write an m (for the currently open file) or an m-chord
          (for a file not currently open).  Using the Help file as the
          currently open file, you hear something like, "Help; Date:
          12/22/92; Time: 10:38. Enter file command".  If you write the
          letter m, instead of chording it, the Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Enter filename" and waits for you to tell it which file you want
          checked.  Once you write the file's name, say, the "address" file
          we created back in Chapter 2, the Braille 'n Speak should tell
          you that file's creation date and time and leave you back in the
          Files menu waiting for you to issue another command.  Exit with
          an e or an e-chord.
               To get the "byte-count" of a file, that is, the number of
          charac ters in the file (including spaces and carriage returns
          and everything), from the Files menu press a wh-sign-chord. 
          Still using the Help file as our currently open file, you hear
          some thing like, "Help, 10,196 bytes. Enter file command".  Bytes
          become important when you're transmitting data and have a disk
          that's almost full   and you're trying to fit one more Braille 'n
          Speak file onto that disk, for example, or when you're transmit
          ting a file over a modem and need to tell the person at the other
          end what size file to expect.
               As we said earlier, if you want to check out the byte count
          of a file not currently open, from the Files menu write the wh-
          sign to hear the prompt, "Enter filename".  Writing the name of







          the file whose byte count you want followed by an e-chord quickly
          produces the information for you.  As usual, you are left in the
          Files menu.  Exit with an e or e-chord to return to your
          currently open file.
               Now that we've seen the different ways to get file
          information, let's move on to the stopwatch and timer, yet
          another bonus built into the Braille 'n Speak.
               3.2 THE STOPWATCH AND THE TIMER
               The stopwatch and the timer work "hand in hand" on the
          Braille 'n Speak; that is, you use the same choice from the
          Options menu to select either one.  Basically, making the choice
          for "Watch" from the Options menu brings you into a mode where
          you can use either the stopwatch or the timer.  It's interesting
          to note that the function of a stopwatch is in effect the
          opposite of the function of a timer.  While a stopwatch times the
          duration of an event for you, the timer counts down the duration
          you have set for an event.
               Let's look at the stopwatch first.
               3.2.1 The Stopwatch
               The Braille 'n Speak's stopwatch performs all the functions
          you expect: it counts down the time you set, it tells you how
          much time has elapsed since you set it, and so on.
               To enter the stopwatch mode, you make a choice from the
          Options menu.  Enter an o-chord as usual to bring up the prompt,
          "Op tion", then write a w (for watch).
               The Braille 'n Speak says, "Stopwatch ready".
               When you are in the stopwatch mode you can perform only
          stopwatch tasks.  That is, you cannot ask for the date, the time
          of day, perform calculations, read or write text, etc.  In order
          to perform those functions, you have to exit the stopwatch mode
          with a z-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak confirms, "Exit
               " and leaves you back in whatever file you were last
          working.
               3.2.1.1 Starting and Stopping the Stopwatch3.2.1.1 Starting
          and Stopping the Stopwatch
               You can run the stopwatch without setting it to a specified
          time. Enter the stopwatch mode with an o-chord w and at the
               "stopwatch ready" prompt, press dot 6.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Running".  Sit back, relax,
               count backwards from ten slowly, then press dot 6 again. 
          The Braille 'n Speak announces a time interval followed by the
          word "stopped", something like, "25 seconds 3 tenths stopped".
               Next, press dot 6 again.  The Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Running". As you press dot 6, start naming the days of the week. 
          When you have finished, press dot 6 again.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says a number followed by the word "stopped".  Notice that the
          number is bigger than the number spoken when you timed your
          count-down. The stopwatch has added the time you took to recite
          the days of the week to the time you took to run your count-down. 
          An excel lent use of the stopwatch is for calling "time-out"
          during an event.
               3.2.1.2 Reading Elapsed Time3.2.1.2 Reading Elapsed Time
               Let's repeat our count-down from ten backwards but this time
          start the stopwatch by pressing dot 6.  Once the Braille 'n Speak







          says "Running", recite your count-down.   After speaking each
          number, press the spacebar.  Each time you do, the Braille 'n
          Speak announces a new time.  You are observing the passage of
          time.  Each time you press the spacebar, the stopwatch announces
          the time at the instant the key is pressed.  With the stopwatch
          in the stopped condition, if you press the spacebar, The Braille
          'n Speak announces the present time followed by the word
          "stopped".  It might say something like, "7 seconds 8 tenths
          stopped".
               Now let's suppose you have pressed the spacebar to read the
          stopwatch but are interrupted by a slamming door.  You need to
          hear this last announcement again.  Write a c to hear the most
          recent time announced again and again. 
               Press c as often as you like.  Even with the stopwatch still
          running, the time you heard last when you pressed the spacebar is
          announced.
               Now go ahead and press the spacebar again.  Notice that some
          time has elapsed since we started.  Probably you'll hear
          something like, "5 minutes 30 seconds 3 tenths", for example.
               But how do you stop the watch from running and how do you
          set it? Let's check that out next.
               3.2.1.3 Stopping and Resetting the Stopwatch3.2.1.3 Stopping
          and Resetting the Stopwatch
               We have learned that pressing dot 6 stops and starts the
          stop watch without resetting the time to 0.  The final stopwatch
          command we'll look at does both.
               With the stopwatch running, press dot 3.  The Braille 'n
          Speak says the time elapsed since you started the watch running
          fol lowed by the words "stopped reset".  Suppose you did not hear
          the time announcement portion of the message.  Will writing a c
          let you hear it again?  Yes, it will.  What happens if you press
          the spacebar?  In that case, you'll hear the message, "stopped".
          Pressing c again also causes "stopped" to be repeated. 
               By the way, the stopwatch does not operate only when the
          Braille 'n Speak  is turned on.  If you have the stopwatch
          running when you turn off the unit, when you turn it back on, the
          stopwatch will pick up its time right where it left off.  The
          stopwatch has a capacity of 23 hours 59 minutes 59.9 seconds. 
          Chances are, you won't need it to be running for a whole day,
          though.
               3.2.2 The Timer
               In a sense, the count-down timer is similar to an alarm
          clock or kitchen timer.  Once you start the count-down timer, you
          can cancel it but you cannot put it on "hold".
               You need to be in Stopwatch mode to use the timer.  Press an
          o- chord w if you're not in it already.
               To start the timer, enter a braille number-sign (dots
          3-4-5-6). The Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter count-down minutes". 
          Using "dropped numbers", write a 2, then write an e-chord.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "enter count-down seconds".  Write the
          number 15, then press an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak should
          now say, "Counting".
               Now just sit back and wait.  In one minute and fifteen
          seconds, the Braille 'n Speak will say, "one minute".  If you







          continue to wait, at the end of two minutes the Braille 'n Speak
          will say, "time is up,  stopwatch ready".
               3.2.2.1 Finding out Time Remaining3.2.2.1 Finding out Time
          Remaining
               Let's see how to determine how much time remains on the
          timer.
               Return to the count-down timer and enter 2 minutes 15
          seconds again.  Then enter an e-chord and listen for the Braille
          'n Speak to say, "Counting".  After a few seconds, press the
          spacebar. The Braille 'n Speak might say something like, "0
          minutes 30 seconds remaining".  Pressing the spacebar repeatedly
          tells you how much time remains to be counted down.
               3.2.2.2 Timing In the Background3.2.2.2 Timing In the
          Background
               If you are timing an event, you may have better things to do
          than staying with your Braille 'n Speak and pressing the spacebar
          every so often to see how much time remains.  As long as you
          leave the unit turned on, you are free to write or read text and
          perform other activities as long as you end your count-down
          request by writing an e-chord twice.  Here's an example.
               Set your count-down timer to 1 minute 20 seconds.  When you
          have written the 20, write an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Counting".  Write another e-chord and the Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Okay" and returns you to whatever file you were last
          working in before you entered the Stopwatch mode and to the exact
          place where you were working.
               Even if you're just reading, and it's a long file, after the
          end of the minute and twenty seconds, the Braille 'n Speak will
          stop reading and say, "time is up".  However, it will not say,
          "stop watch ready", as it did before.  You're still in your file,
          exactly at the place where the timer interrupted to let you know
          it had stopped.
               How nice that you don't actually have to be standing in the
          kitchen waiting to hear the timer to go off on your microwave.
          Set it on the Braille 'n Speak instead and keep working in your
          living room.  When dinner is ready, the Braille 'n Speak will let
          you know.







               3.3 THE CALCULATOR
               The Braille 'n Speak's calculator performs all the usual
          calcula tor functions: it can add, subtract, multiply, divide,
          calculate percentages and extract square roots.  You can store
          results of calculations in its six memory locations, whose letter
          labels can facilitate the calculating process.
               3.3.1 Basic Operations
               The calculator uses the standard Nemeth braille symbols for
          the basic operations: addition, subtraction, multiplication, divi
          sion, calculating percentages and computing square roots.  We
          list these braille symbols here for your convenience.
               addition - dots 3-4-6 (ing-sign)

          subtraction - dots 3-6 (hyphen)
          multiplication - dots 1-6 (ch-sign)
          division - dots 3-4 (st-sign)
          percent - dots 1-4-6 (sh-sign)
          square root - dots 3-4-5-chord (ar-sign)
          decimal point - dots 4-6

               To enter the calculator mode, you make a choice from the
          Options menu as usual.  This time you press an o-chord c.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Option, Calculator ready".  When you're
          finished with the calculator, you can return to the file in which
          you were working by simply pressing a z-chord, just as we did to
          exit both the count-down timer and stopwatch.  When you do, the
          Braille 'n Speak confirms, "Exit".
               Now let's run through some examples of using the calculator.
          We'll assume that you're in calculator mode.
               To perform any computation with the calculator, you write an
          arithmetic expression including all appropriate operations
          symbols (like a plus sign, for example) and you end the expres
          sion with an e-chord.  You never include spaces in your computa
          tion as you might when writing something out on a piece of paper.
          You use only "dropped" numbers to calculate and the Braille 'n
          Speak recognizes the operations symbols listed above as a command
          to perform the particular operation.  Entering an e-chord tells
          the Braille 'n Speak, "Okay, go and figure this out and tell me
          the answer, please."
               Write 2+2 followed by an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak
          responds, "4" or "four period".  The response varies with how
          your speech parameters for punctuation announcement are set.
               To do another calculation, you do not have to clear the
          calculat or.  The Braille 'n Speak assumes that when you enter a
          number after you have obtained a result with an e-chord, you are
          start ing another calculation.
               Write 375-157 followed by an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak
          responds, "218".
               To be absolutely sure that the calculator is cleared for
          another computation, simply press a 0-chord (dots 3-5-6) and the
          Braille 'n Speak confirms, "Clear".
               Now go ahead and try a few sample calculations on your own,
          using some other operations, like multiplication.  Try decimals,
          try big numbers.







               A couple of notes:
               When working with negative numbers, you must clear the
          calculator between one computation and the next.  (Negative
          numbers are often used in algebraic expressions.  If you're not
          familiar with their use, don't worry about it.)  Otherwise, the
          effect of your calculations is cumulative.
               When you enter the sign of operation for addition,
          subtraction, multiplication or division, the Braille 'n Speak
          announces the word "plus, minus, times divided by".
               3.3.2 Setting Precision
               So far, the calculations in our examples have come out even.
          There have been no remainders.  If you divide 100 by 14, the
          Braille 'n Speak's response varies according to the number of
          decimal places to which your calculator is set.  This is referred
          to as the "precision" of the calculator.  Usually, two decimal
          places is enough since that's all you need for currency.  But
          occasionally you'll want a more precise response.  Here's how to
          change the decimal precision on the calculator.
               From within calculator mode, press a p-chord. At the Braille
          'n Speak prompt, "Enter precision", write 3 followed by an
          e-chord. The Braille 'n Speak now says, "Okay" to confirm your
          new set ting.
               Now the calculator is set to compute out to three decimal
          places. Let's check it.
               Write 100/14 followed by an e-chord.  You should hear,
          "7.142".
               You can set the calculator to a maximum precision of twelve
          decimal places.  However, be aware that the calculator drops 0's
          at the end of a result.  For example, if you divide 300000 by
          1190 and you have precision set to 2, you will get 252.1 as a
          result.  If you set the precision to 3, you will still get 252.1
          as a result.  When you increase precision to 4 you discover that
          your result is 252.1008.  The second and third decimal places
          were 0 and were not spoken.
               3.3.3 Inserting Calculation Results into a File
               Work in your file as you normally do, writing text, cutting
          and pasting text, inserting and deleting text.  When you're ready
          to insert the result of a calculation into your text, simply get
          into calculator mode at that point.  Then perform your calcula
          tion.  Next, having obtained the desired result, with an e-chord,
          exit the calculator with a z-chord.  Finally, press an i-chord
          followed by an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak remembers that you
          just calculated something and immediately inserts it into your
          open file and places you there, ready to continue working.
               3.3.4 Performing Percentage Calculations
               Many people find dealing with percents baffling, to say the
          least.  Nevertheless, we provide a couple of examples here for
          your convenience.  Besides, we all use percentages far more than
          we realize  in daily transactions.
               We'll assume that you're in calculator mode, ready to
          compute something.
               To determine what percent one number is of another number,
          first write the value of the percentage, then write the percent
          sign, and finally write the number whose percentage you want to







          calcu late.  As usual, finish the computation with an e-chord.
               For example, to find 50 percent of 26, write 50 % 26 e-chord
          (remembering not to put spaces in between each part of the
          expression).  The Braille 'n Speak responds, "13".  Make sense?
          Fifty percent of something is half of it, so clearly thirteen is
          half of twenty-six.
               By the way, for those of you who are considering using the
          Braille 'n Speak for algebraic calculations, the Braille 'n Speak
          does not come ready to do that "out of the box".  It can't, for
          example, perform calculations within parentheses.  This is a
          relatively simple machine and if you need that sort of result,
          you will have to perform the calculations within parentheses one
          at a time and perhaps store the results in the Braille 'n Speak's
          calculator memory locations.  However, there is a Scientific
          Calculator on disk with its own documentation (free when pur
          chased with Blazie's external disk drive) which you can add to
          the 640 that does allow you to get rather fancy.
               3.3.5 Storing and Using the Six Memory Locations
               The Braille 'n Speak calculator has six memory locations
          where you can store results of computations.  These MEMORY
          locations are labeled A, B, C, D, E, and F.  Results you store in
          them are saved after exiting the calculator mode and turning off
          the Braille 'n Speak.
               There are two ways to store a number in a memory location:
               One way is to store the result of a calculation.  First
          write an arithmetic expression and press an e-chord to compute
          its result. Then press an s-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Store". Write the letter of the memory location where you want
          to store it, for example, A.  The Braille 'n Speak confirms,
          "Okay".
               A second way is to start with a cleared calculator memory
          and simply write a number followed by an e-chord.  Then press an
          s-- chord followed by the letter of the memory location where you
          want it stored.
               To read the contents of a memory location, simply write the
          letter of that location followed by an e-chord.
               If you have stored a number in a memory location, you can
          use that number within a calculation.  Write the letter of the
          memory location where you stored the number as part of the
          expression to be calculated.  For example, write 3-2 followed by
          an e-chord. At the response, "1", press an s-chord A to store the
          result in memory location A.  Write 3-1 followed by an e-chord. 
          At the response, "2", press an s-chord B to store this result in
          memory location B.  So now you have numbers stored in memory
          locations A and B.  Write a+b followed by an e-chord. The Braille
          'n Speak looks up the number stored in each memory location and
          calcu lates, "3".  You were able to add the numbers using only
          the letter labels of the memory locations.
               There is a special memory location we haven't mentioned yet,
          the letter R.  Recall that to press an e-chord at the end of a
          calculation produces a result.  You can store a result in its own
          special memory location by simply writing the letter R.  You
          don't have to use the s-chord at all.  Then you can use it the
          same way we described above for the other memory locations







          labeled A through F.
               With a bit of practice, you can use the memory locations to
          store long numbers, or important ones (like the amount of your
          pay check), so that you can track how it's dwindling as you go
          through the week.







               3.3.6 Extracting a Square Root
               To xtract the square root of a number, press an ar-sign-
          chord (dots 3-4-5) immediately following the number.  For
          example, to extract the square root of 25, simply write the
          number "25" followed by an ar-sign-chord.  You don't even need to
          press an e- chord to hear the Braille 'n Speak say, "5".
               3.3.7 Error Messages and Tips
               If you set the calculator an impossible task, such as
          dividing 17 by 0, the Braille 'n Speak rejects the expression
          with, "Error".
               If you use an incorrect chord for an e-chord, the Braille 'n
          Speak says, "not valid calculator command".
               You can use the backspace (b-chord) to make corrections. 
          For example, if you want to add .5 and .5 but write .4 as your
          second entry, press a b-chord to erase the 4 and then write the 5
          followed by an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak responds to your
          corrected entry with, "1".
               If you haven't pressed an e-chord yet, you can hear the
          calcula tion you have written thus far by pressing a c-chord. 
          Once you press the e-chord, however, pressing c-chord is
          ineffective.
               Finally, pressing an f-chord toggles you between speaking
          numbers as digits or full words from within Calculator mode.
               You can see that the calculator is quite a bonus.  Now let's
          turn to some other handy tools that come with the Braille 'n
          Speak.
               ** 3.4 WORD EXCEPTIONS** 3.4 WORD EXCEPTIONS
               Note: This section is unique to the 640.
               The Braille 'n Speak is obviously a very handy device for so
          many tasks.  But oh, how frustrating that it can't pronounce
          certain things just right!  Well, that's the price you pay for
          mechanical speech, isn't it?
               Not really.  You can get the Braille 'n Speak to pronounce
          things just the way you want.  The word exceptions dictionary
          takes care of funny-sounding words, proper names and
          abbreviations.
               You can create a special file containing unusual words or
          letter combinations (acronyms) that the Braille 'n Speak may not
          recog nize.  Take, for example, the letters "USA" - a very common
          abbreviation, isn't it?  Yet, the Braille 'n Speak can't be
          expected to take everything into account.
               Get into an existing file or create a new one for practicing
          with this concept.  For our example, we'll use our "practice"
          file from Chapter 2.  Get into it now.  Let's start with a clean
          slate.  We'll assume that your "practice" file is empty.  If it
          isn't, delete whatever practice junk you have in it at this time.
               Write "USA" and notice that the Braille 'n Speak says, "use-
          ah" as if it were a word.  We'll create a file called "word.fix"
          to keep track of such anomalies so that when we write the
          abbrevia tion, the Braille 'n Speak will pronounce it correctly.
               Get into the Files menu and create a file called "word.fix"
          having one Braille 'n Speak page and having braille translation
          "off".  Within this new file, write in ASCII only, not in Grade 2
          braille, the letters "USA" just as before except this time follow







          the letters immediately by an ASCII equals sign (dots 1-2-3-4-5-
          6) and then write each letter separated by spaces.  So your text
          should look like this: (We spell this out precisely in braille
          terms for clarity.)
               "usa dots 1-2-3-4-5-6 u space s space a".
               Now press a carriage return, a dots 4-6-chord.
               You have just created your first "word exception".  Go back
          to your file called "practice" where you had the text that caused
          this havoc in the first place.  Does the Braille 'n Speak now say
          "U.S.A." or does it still say "use-ah"?  It may or it may not.
          That depends on whether the Braille 'n Speak is awake and looking
          out for word exceptions.
               Check the Status menu to see whether Word Exceptions is "on"
          or "off".  You do this by pressing an st-sign-chord (dots 3-4)
          from any point in your work.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Status
          menu".  To find out whether Word Exceptions is in effect, write a
          letter e (for Exceptions).  The Braille 'n Speak should say
          something like, "Exceptions check on".  To turn it off, simply
          press an n, to turn it on, press a y.  Exit the Status menu with
          an e-chord.
               What's important about the word exceptions dictionary is
          that you must be using computer braille when you write in it. 
          You write the word or phrase or acronym followed immediately by
          an ASCII equal sign and then the correction.  This feature of the
          Braille 'n Speak is especially nice for proper names and for all
          those alphabet soup acronyms that are part of life nowadays.
               Next, we'll look at macros, and no, we don't mean fish.
               3.5 MACROS
               If you already work with computers, you are probably already
          familiar with the concept of macros.  As with previous concepts
          in this manual, we assume that you may not be familiar with a
          concept when we first introduce it.  The Braille 'n Speak is such
          a versatile, yet user-friendly device, that many of you may be
          first-time users.  Those of you who know about macros may wish to
          skip this introductory section and go directly to the section on
          how to create and execute macros.
               3.5.1 What's a Macro, Anyway?
               Have you noticed that there are some key sequences we
          perform all the time?  For example, we're always telling you to
          "get to the Files menu", which usually means pressing an o-chord
          f.  Big deal.  That's only two keystrokes.
               But what if you check your calendar several times a day, for
          example, or if you jump in and out of a certain file all the time
          to look up a phone number?  The several keystrokes involved may
          be a nuisance to repeat and maybe you just don't want to take the
          time.  Granted, the Braille 'n Speak shuts up as soon as you
          press a key during the processing of a command.  You don't
          necessarily have to listen to it speak an entire prompt before
          you respond to it - a time-saver.
               But it's convenient to simply use a two-keystroke command
          that performs some things automatically for you that would
          otherwise be tedious.  Let's look at an example.
               Suppose you constantly need to access your address file to
          look up a phone number.  That's probably the most practical use







          of a macro that readily comes to mind.  Ordinarily, you would do
          the following, as you'll recall from Chapter 2:
               Press o-chord.  At the "Option" prompt, write an f.  At the
          "Enter file command" prompt, write an o.  At the "Enter file to
          open" prompt, spell out the name of the file followed by an e-
          chord.  At the "filename now open" prompt, press an l-chord to
          get to the top of the file.  At the "Top of file" prompt, press
          an f-chord.  At the "Enter text to find" prompt, write the name
          of the person whose number you want to find.  Then press an e-
          chord.  Assuming the name is found, the Braille 'n Speak says the
          name.  Then press a dot 4-chord to hear the phone number follow
          ing the name.  Then press an o-chord followed by an f followed by
          an o followed by the name of the file you were in before, fol
          lowed by an e-chord to get back there.
               A fatiguing exercise when repeated regularly, no matter how
          fast you are.  The Braille 'n Speak can help make the whole
          business a lot easier with a macro.  Yes, you could eliminate
          some of the steps above if you know that the address file is file
          number 5 and you press an o-chord followed by a dropped "05" to
          get there, etc.  But overall, you're still dealing with a lot of
          keystrokes. The power of a macro is its ability to reduce
          significantly the number of keystrokes you have to perform in
          order to accomplish a task that you perform repeatedly.
               Now let's see how it all works.
               3.5.2 Recording a Macro
               Although every aspect of macros we discuss below is
          available in both models of the Braille 'n Speak, the Classic
          stores macros internally rather than in a separate file. 
          However, when you create a macro for the first time in the 640,
          it automatically creates a file called "macros.sys" and places it
          at the end of your file list.  The "macros.sys" file stores the
          macros you create so that when you want to perform (or execute)
          them, the Braille 'n Speak can find them.
               You can create a macro of up to 63 keystrokes (for the 640)
          and up to 41 keystrokes (for the Classic).  During the process of
          recording a macro, about six keystrokes before the maximum
          allowed, you are alerted with a beep.  The number of macros you
          can create is limited only by the number of characters in your
          braille repertory.  You can name a macro by a letter of the
          alphabet; or, you can name it by any braille symbol, like the-
          sign (dots 2-3-4-6).  We suggest, however, that you keep to
          naming your macros by letters of the alphabet that have some
          significance to you later on.  For example, a macro for your
          calendar should probably be named by the letter c.
               A word of caution: When you are creating (or recording) a
          macro, that is literally what you are doing.  You are performing
          the sequence of keystrokes that you want to automate and
          "recording" that sequence at the same time.  So we strongly
          recommend that you record a macro very slowly and carefully to
          avoid writing erroneous keystrokes.  This is especially important
          if part of the macro is supposed to delete or add text or files. 
          Imagine your surprise if you accidentally delete the wrong file
          as you're recording your macro.  It could be a costly mistake. 
          Oh, it won't matter by the time you go to execute the macro. 







          You'll already have deleted the file.  So remember that recording
          a macro is like recording on your tape recorder with a live micro
          phone.  Unwanted conversation or extraneous noises can creep into
          a recording.  Likewise, unwanted keystrokes can creep into a
          macro if you're not very careful.
               We'll start with a very simple example of recording a macro.
               Let's get into the file called "practice" and go to the end
          of the file.  We'll create a macro that simply adds one day to
          today's date and inserts that date into our file.  You might use
          this at the end of each day to "move your calendar forward a
          day".
               We start by checking today's date.  For sample purposes,
          we'll say that today is Friday, January 1, 1993.  To begin
          recording the macro, we suggest that you first run through all
          the steps of the macro to make sure that each step does exactly
          what you want. Remember that when you're actually recording the
          macro, you are in fact performing the steps that you are
          recording.  So, it's best to plan carefully.
               The steps to the process we've described in our sample are
          as follows:
               (Note: This example assumes that you are using the 640; you
          may need to substitute another example if you have a Classic.)
               o-chord g followed by a "dropped" 1, e-chord, i-chord,
          e-chord.
               Those steps do the following:
               o-chord g gets you into calendar mode.  Writing the "1"
          moves the calendar forward a day from today's date.  Pressing an
          e-chord causes the Braille 'n Speak to announce that date. 
          Pressing an i-chord gets you into Insert mode and pressing the
          final e-chord inserts the date just spoken by the Braille 'n
          Speak into your file.
               Now let's perform the actual recording.  Make sure that
          you're at the end of your file and that the last three characters
          are hard carriage returns (dots 4-6-chords).  If they are not,
          write them in now.
               To start recording a macro, press an n-chord.  The Braille
          'n Speak says, "Macro, enter a key."  We'll enter a letter c (for
          calendar).  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Recording."
               Go ahead and perform the steps we described above and don't
          worry about the Braille 'n Speak prompts.  If you make a mistake
          during the process, simply abort the recording with a z-chord. 
          Assuming that you enter all the steps correctly, you should have
          entered the following.  We place a comma in between each entry
          merely for clarity:
               o-chord, g, 1, e-chord, i-chord, e-chord.
               Press another n-chord to complete the recording of this
          macro. The Braille 'n Speak should say, "Macro end."  Notice that
          when you check the last line of your currently open file, you do
          indeed have tomorrow's date.  So, as we advised, the Braille 'n
          Speak not only recorded your macro but also performed the steps
          within it.
               Now let's look at how to execute this macro again.  We'll
          pretend that it's now tomorrow and that we want to add the
          following day to our calendar.







               3.5.3 Executing an Existing Macro
               To invoke a macro that you've already created is a matter of
          two simple keystrokes, the first of which is always a j-chord and
          the second of which is the letter (or other braille symbol) that
          you named your macro.
               If you are recording a macro and want to incorporate an
          existing one into it, as you're recording, press a j-chord at the
          point where you want the previously existing macro to "take
          over", instead of pressing an n-chord to complete the recording
          process. Then write the character that represents the name of the
          previ ously existing macro.
               Let's see how to execute the macro we just recorded.  Get to
          the end of your "practice" file and write in three hard carriage
          returns.
               Execute the macro for calendar update by pressing a j-chord. 
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "Macro".  It's waiting for the
          character designation.  Now write the letter c.  Whether the
          Braille 'n Speak actually voices each step in the processing of
          the macro depends on whether the unit is set to speak macros. 
          For now, we'll assume that it is speaking the steps as it
          performs them.
               Notice that the Braille 'n Speak finishes the whole process
          far faster than you could have.  You should be at the point in
          your file that says tomorrow's date.
               What?  Shouldn't it say the day after tomorrow?  Well,
          remember that we were pretending that tomorrow is already here
          and that we were adding another day to our calendar.  The Braille
          'n Speak doesn't know about our game and so it simply added one
          day to today's date and inserted that date into your file.  If it
          were tomorrow, you'd find that this macro would add the next day
          to your file.  Remember that the Braille 'n Speak keeps time and
          knows what date today is.  Try this macro again tomorrow and
          you'll see that it works as we suggest.
               Incidentally, we added those extra hard carriage returns
          because the Braille 'n Speak inserts a date by replacing the last
          charac ter in your file with a space.  If you had not placed
          those hard carriage returns at the end of your file, you might
          have ended up with the date being part of the last line of text
          that was already in your file.
               3.5.4 How to Check a Macro
               You can control whether the Braille 'n Speak voices the
          steps of a macro as it executes it.  From anywhere within a file,
          you can "Kill" macro speech with a k-chord or "verbalize" macro
          speech with a v-chord.  Whether to include k-chord and v-chord
          commands in your macro when you record it is a matter of choice. 
          Once you become accustomed to using macros, you'll probably want
          speech turned off as a macro is executing.  Certainly, the task
          you set the macro to perform is accomplished much faster if the
          Braille 'n Speak doesn't have to run through its prompts as it's
          perform ing the task.  But until you're very comfortable with
          macros, we suggest that you press a v-chord to have the macro
          voice what it's doing.  This is also helpful if you forget what a
          macro is supposed to do and want to check that out.
               Next we'll talk about how to pause the processing of a macro







          so that you can respond to a prompt or enter text and then let
          the macro continue.  This is where the full power of macros
          becomes self-evident.
               3.5.5 Pausing a Macro
               In our introduction to macros, we suggested a rather
          elaborate example of a macro where you search for text in your
          address file.  Let's see how this works.  The assumption
          underlying the process here is that the macro will pause long
          enough for you to enter the text you're trying to find and then
          go find it for you.
               To pause a macro while it's executing, you issue a special
          command as you record the macro at the point where you want to
          pause the processing of the macro.  Press a ch-sign-chord (dots
          1-6) once to pause the macro for you to enter a single character.
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "Pause".  Or, press ch-sign-chord
          twice to pause the macro for you to enter a full line of text.
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "Line pause".  When pausing the macro
          so that you may enter more than a single character, you tell the
          macro to continue processing with an e-chord.  The Braille 'n
          Speak confirms, "Pause end."
               Let's go through an example.  We won't make this as
          complicated as the one we suggested earlier.  Let's simply
          automate the Search process to become a "Search and Replace"
          process.
               Get into your "practice" file and delete all of its
          contents. (Make sure there's nothing you need to keep first, of
          course.) We want to start with an empty file for this example.
               Now write the following:
               "Mary had  a little lamb."
               Silly, yes.  But for sample purposes, it will do the job.
               We're going to write a macro that will find specific text
          and replace it with other text.  We don't know what text
          specifically we want to find at this point; nor do we know with
          what text we'll want to replace it.  All we know is that we want
          to find text, delete that text and then replace it with new text.
               So our macro will have the following steps in it:
               l-chord (top of file),
               f-chord (the command to find text),
               ch-sign-chord, ch-sign-cord (to pause the macro for us to
          enter the text we want to find),
               e-chord, e-chord (the first to end the pause, the second to
          go and find the text),
               d-chord w (to delete the word that was found),
               i-chord (to place us in Insert mode),
               ch-sign-chord, ch-sign-chord (to pause the macro again for
          us to write the word with which we are replacing the old one),
               e-chord, e-chord (the first to end the pause, the second to
          enter the word we are replacing into the file and exit Insert
          mode).
               That's the end of the macro.
               Since this macro has prompts we need to hear, press a
          v-chord to verbalize macro speech before starting the recording
          process.  Go ahead and record this macro starting and ending with
          an n-chord and naming it with the letter s (for Search).  As you







          are record ing it, answer the prompt, "Enter text to find" with,
          "mary" and answer the prompt, "Insert" with, "jane ".  Notice
          that we ended "Jane" with a space.  Remember that the Braille 'n
          Speak can't know whether we're inserting a single word or a line
          or what.  So since we know that another word follows the old word
          we deleted in the sentence, we have to include a space in our
          replacement.
               After pressing the final n-chord that completes the
          recording of your macro, read what's in your file.  You should
          hear "Jane had a little lamb."
               Let's execute this macro with a j-chord s and see what
          happens.
               You should hear, "Top of file, enter text to find, line
          pause." Write "lamb" and press an e-chord to let the macro
          continue. You'll hear, "Pause end".
               Then you should hear, "Okay, Delete parameter, Word, Okay,
          Insert mode active, line pause."  Write "dog" followed by an
          e-chord to let the macro finish.  You'll hear, "Pause end".  Now
          read what's in your file.  You should hear, "Jane had a little
          dog."
               You now have a "Search and Replace" facility that didn't
          come from the factory.  You created it yourself with the power of
          macros.
               Incidentally, you could turn the macro we just created into
          a full "search and replace" facility for the entire file by
          having "chained" it to itself.  Recall that we said you could end
          the recording of one macro with a j-chord followed by the name of
          a previously existing one that you wanted to "take over" at a
          certain point.  If you were to re-record the macro we just
          created and ended it with a j-chord s, instead of an n-chord, you
          would have a macro that will continue running throughout the
          file.  Of course, you can cancel it anywhere in the process with
          a z-chord.  It might be useful to experiment with this concept
          with a junk file and a simple macro.
               Getting back to our original, "search and replace" macro,
          what would happen if the text you are searching for is not found? 
          The macro simply aborts at that point.  So you don't even have to
          worry about having words accidentally deleted by invoking this
          particular macro.
               3.5.6 Write-Protecting Macros
               Since we've created such a masterpiece of a macro, let's
          make sure we protect it.  What if you forgot, for instance, that
          you already have a macro labeled with the letter s.  You could
          acci dentally start recording a new macro, erasing the one we so
          painstakingly created before.  To avoid this potential hazard,
          you might consider protecting your macros.
               Press an n-chord as if you were going to record a macro.  At
          the prompt, "Macro, enter a key", press a p-chord.  The Braille
          'n Speak says, "Write-protected".  Now if you try to write over
          an existing macro, the Braille 'n Speak stops you with, "Write-
          protected".  In fact, you won't be able to create any new macros
          while in this mode.  It's similar to write-protecting your impor
          tant files.  When you try to write anything into a write-protect
          ed file, the Braille 'n Speak issues a similar message, "File is







          write-protected".
               By the way, the "macros.sys" file is always protected.  You
          couldn't write in it even if you wanted to do so.
               To be able to write a macro again, you can unprotect them
          with an n-chord u-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak will simply say,
          "Unpro tected" and you'll be able to write macros once again.
               Clearly, macros are extremely helpful for adding even more
          flexibility to the Braille 'n Speak.
               Our final topics in this chapter deal with a couple of
          special modes in which you can use the Braille 'n Speak.
               3.6 THE ONE-HANDED BRAILLE 'N SPEAK3.6 THE ONE-HANDED
          BRAILLE 'N SPEAK
               Some people need to use the Braille 'n Speak with one hand,
          rather than two.  For those special cases, the Braille 'n Speak
          can be turned into a "one-handed" device.
               To turn the Braille 'n Speak into a device that accepts key
          strokes for one-handed use only, simply press a dot 6 as you turn
          on the unit.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "One-hand mode on,
          Braille 'n Speak ready, (filename) now open".
               From this point on, the Braille 'n Speak accepts keystrokes
          as follows:
               The spacebar is your focal point.  To write a character that
          involves only dots to either side of the spacebar, simply write
          the character, for example an l (dots 1-2-3) followed by the
          spacebar.  The l is now entered into your file.  If you need to
          write a character that involves dots on both sides of the space
          bar, say a g, then write the left half first (dots 1-2) and then
          the right half (dots 4-5) followed by a spacebar to enter the
          character into your file.  You could have written the right half
          first, then the left half, or you could have pressed each key
          individually.  The important thing to remember is that the
          character is entered only after you press the spacebar.
               To enter chords is a little more complicated.  You enter a
          chord in one-handed mode by starting with a space.  Then you
          press the appropriate dots on either side of the spacebar and end
          with another space.  For example, to get to the end of the file,
          normally a dots 4-5-6-chord) you press the spacebar, then write
          dots 4-5-6, then press the spacebar again.  The Braille 'n Speak
          will then say, "End of file."
               We suggest that you only use this mode if you truly require
          it. For most users, one-hand mode is unnecessary and potentially
          confusing if you accidentally get into it.
               To return the Braille 'n Speak to two-handed mode, simply
          press a dot 3 when next turning on the unit.
               3.7 REVIEW ONLY MODE
               If you want to review the contents of a file but don't want
          to bother having to repeatedly use chords to read paragraph after
          paragraph, you can place yourself temporarily in Review mode by
          choosing it from the Options menu.  Press an o-chord and at the
          "Option" prompt, write an r.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Review
          on, okay."
               Until you issue another chord command, any chord will do,
          you can write characters that you'd normally have to press the
          spacebar with to execute chord commands.  For example, dot 4







          reads you the next line.  Dots 1-4 or the letter c, reads you the
          current line, and so on.  Exit Review mode by simply pressing any
          chord.  The Braille 'n Speak will say, "Off".  Or, turn the unit
          off alto gether to return it to normal use.
               3.8 SUMMARY
               This chapter has covered a staggering array of utilities and
          tools available to you in the Braille 'n Speak.  We suggest that
          you review those parts of the chapter that are especially crucial
          to your daily interactions with the Braille 'n Speak before
          moving on to our next challenge, telecommunications.  It can
          scare some.  Don't worry.  We'll keep it as simple as possible.
          As with the contents of the present chapter, you'll find that
          hooking up the Braille 'n Speak to other devices can only enhance
          your productivity.  Take a deep breath.  And let's move on.







               Chapter 4 - Communicating with Other Devices


                     Chapter 4 - Communicating with Other Devices

               Up to now, we've looked at the Braille 'n Speak as a "stand-
          alone" device.  In computerese, such a device can perform tasks
          on its own, without being hooked up to any other devices.  And
          we've seen how powerful the Braille 'n Speak is all by itself.
               We now start examining how the Braille 'n Speak can give you
          even more flexibility in your everyday life, by hooking it up to
          other devices: printers, computers, disk drives, modems.
               No doubt, you've heard that things get real technical when
          words like "cable", "serial versus parallel", and even that big
          word, "telecommunications", come on the scene.  Consequently,
          many shy away from exploring what telecommunications can mean to
          them.  It is indeed very easy to slide into jargon when
          discussing the sub ject.  The good news is, you don't have to be
          a techie-whizz in order to hook up your Braille 'n Speak to
          another device.
               As with previous sections of this manual, we assume that you
          may not be familiar with the subject of telecommunications and
          that an introduction will help to demistify it for you.  If
          you're already acquainted with the jargon, we suggest that you
          skim over the first section of this chapter anyway because we
          discuss how you can customize telecommunications settings.  You
          might then just skip to those sections that interest you.  For
          example, you may not want to hook up the Braille 'n Speak to a
          disk drive. You may only want to know about how to hook it up to
          a PC or printer or modem.  Therefore, each section is self-
          contained.
               4.1 INTRODUCING TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND SETTINGS
               What do you do when using your telephone or watching your
          televi sion?  Why, you are sending and receiving, of course:
          voice through the phone and pictures through the TV.
               Telecommunications is simply the ability to send and receive
          information to and from one place to another, from one device to
          another.  It is accomplished through cables linking the devices
          and by matching up various settings on the devices being linked.
               4.1.1 Cables
               The Braille 'n Speak comes with a cable that you can connect
          to many printers, computers, even modems.  At times you can make
          the connection without additional adapters or connectors - most
          printers, for example.  But more often, devices require that
          cable adapters or additional cables be connected between the
          Braille 'n Speak cable and the other device.
               Let's clear up some of the mystery around cables right off. 
          It's not important that you understand the technical details
          surround ing cabling issues, just that you be aware of what kind
          of connectors you may need.
               There are four things to consider when linking the Braille
          'n Speak to another device: serial versus parallel, gender,
          number of pins, null modem cable requirements.  Don't be scared
          off by these terms.  We promise not to get techie.







               4.1.1.1 Serial versus Parallel
               The Braille 'n Speak is a serial device.  What's important
          here is that you determine that the device to which you wish to
          link the Braille 'n Speak is also serial.  (The manual that came
          with the device should tell you and the dealer can give you this
          information even before you purchase the device.)  If it is not,
          you'll need to get a serial-to-parallel converter cable before
          you can do anything else.  Since the Braille 'n Speak is a serial
          device and most other devices today are too, you usually don't
          have a problem with this issue.  So we'll assume that you're
          linking the Braille 'n Speak to another serial device.
               4.1.1.2 Gender4.1.1.2 Gender
               Another thing to determine about cables is the sex of the
          connec tor and the sex of the port to which you're linking it.
               Examine each end of the Braille 'n Speak cable.  You have a
          connector that is small and square at one end and a connector
          that is larger and flatter on the other end.  Notice that the
          small, square connector, which is the one that plugs into the
          Braille 'n Speak, has a single dot at the top and two dots on the
          bottom.  This is to guide you as to how to plug the cable into
          the Braille 'n Speak.  Also, notice the tiny holes in the connec
          tor.  This is a female connector.
               Examine the port for this cable.  It is on the left side of
          the Braille 'n Speak as it faces you, furthest away from you and
          toward the back.  The tiny pins sticking out inside the port
          indicate that this is a male port.  In fact, both the ports on
          the Braille 'n Speak are male ports.  You can plug in the Braille
          'n Speak connector into this port easily since it is female and
          the port is male.
               Now check out the other end of the cable that came with your
          Braille 'n Speak.  It may be male or female.  Depending on its
          gender and that of the port to which you're connecting it, you
          may have to get a gender changer.  You plug the opposite sex end
          of the gender changer to the Braille 'n Speak cable, then plug
          the other end of the gender changer into the port on the device.
          Usually, you can obtain serial gender changers from your local
          computer store.  Just be certain what kind of gender changer you
          need before you buy one.  Be specific about the sex of your
          connector and the port so that your salesperson knows exactly
          what to sell to you.
               4.1.1.3 Number of Pins
               Another issue is the number of pin locations on the
          connector and the number that the port can accept.  This number
          must match exactly or, once again, you'll need an adapter.  The
          Braille 'n Speak connector for other devices is a 25-pin
          connector and many ports today are also 25-pin ports.  So you may
          not have a prob lem.  But if the port is serial and even the
          right gender, and you have only a 9-pin cable, you'll need an
          adapter.  Here again, it's not crucial that you understand the
          technical details.  But you do need to know what kind of
          connector you have and what kind of port you're trying to link
          with so that your salesperson can sell you the right adapter.
               4.1.1.4 Null Modem Cable Requirements
               To connect the Braille 'n Speak to a modem, to another







          Braille 'n Speak, and to some computers, you need a special cable
          called a "null modem" cable or adapter.  Some Apple computers,
          for exam ple, require one, although an IBM PC compatible does
          not.  The important pieces of information to note here are the
          genders and the number of pins each connector and port needs in
          order to match up precisely.
               When you purchase a 640, an interface kit containing gender
          changers, a null modem adapter, and even a minitester to help
          with technical problems, comes with the unit.  You can purchase
          this kit from Blazie if you have a Classic, or you can acquire
          the pieces you need from your local computer store.
               Now that we've established the cable requirements, let's
          look at what you need to do to prepare the Braille 'n Speak for
          stepping out into the world of other devices.
               4.1.2 Telecommunications Settings
               Assuming that you've cabled everything correctly, you still
          need to make sure that your Braille 'n Speak telecommunications
          settings match those on the other device.  Often times, trouble
          arises from simply having mismatched speeds or duplex settings or
          whatever.  In this section, we look at how to determine the
          status of these settings and how to change them.
               Both devices you are linking together must be "talking in
          the same language" and be polite enough to be "listening" to each
          other without interrupting as they communicate.  It's also
          crucial that they communicate at the same rate of speed so that
          one isn't overwhelmed by the dizzying rate or turned off by the
          sedate pace of the other.
               Before you start hooking things up, check the manual of the
          other device for the status of telecommunications settings preset
          from the factory on that device (referred to as the "default" set
          tings.)  Chances are that if you need to change any, it will be
          easier to do it from the Braille 'n Speak's side of the link than
          from the other side.
               To see the status of telecommunications settings in the
          Braille 'n Speak, you look them up in the Status menu.  From
          there, you can change them, or simply exit the Status menu with
          either a z- chord or e-chord.  On the other hand, if you just
          want to change a setting but don't need to see its present
          status, you can change the setting from the Parameters menu. 
          We'll show you both as we go through the telecommunications
          settings one at a time. 
               4.1.2.1 Baud Rate
               The speed at which characters is transmitted to and from a
          device is called the Baud rate.  It is preset to 9600 Baud, or
          960 characters per second in the Braille 'n Speak.  To see the
          present value of this setting, get into the Status menu with an
          st-sign-chord (dots 3-4) and enter a b.  The Braille 'n Speak
          tells you the current setting, in this case, "9600 Baud".  You
          can write one or two digits of the setting you wish instead
          (using dropped numbers, as always).
               The possible settings are: 75 (only for the Classic), 150,
          300, 600, 1200, 2400, 4800, 9600, 19200, and 38400 (this last
          setting only in the 640).  Where the first digit is not specific
          enough to identify the desired rate, you may need to write the







          second digit as well.  For example, if you need to set the
          Braille 'n Speak to 150 Baud, you must write 15 since 19200 is
          another possible Baud rate and the Braille 'n Speak can't guess
          which of the two you want.  However, if you need to set the
          Braille 'n Speak to 2400 Baud, you can simply write a 2 and the
          Braille 'n Speak understands.  Remember to exit the Status menu
          with an e- chord to return to your previous work area.  It will
          say, "Exit".
               If you just want to change the Baud rate, get to the
          Parameters menu by pressing a p-chord from wherever you're
          working.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter parameter".  Write a
          b and at the "Enter Baud rate" prompt, simply write the first or
          first and second digits of your choice.  The Braille 'n Speak
          doesn't repeat the Baud rate you've entered.  It just says,
          "Okay." However, if you write an invalid setting, it says,
          "Invalid input" and leaves you back where you were last working. 
          You'll need to start all over again with a p-chord b to issue a
          valid setting.
               4.1.2.2 Parity
               Parity works to keep your transmission error-free.  All you
          need to know is that it can be set to Even, Odd or None.  The
          default is None.  Get into the Status menu with an st-sign-chord
          and write a p.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "No parity".  To
          change it, write an e for Even or an o for Odd.  Exit the Status
          menu with an e-chord.
               To change parity from the Parameters menu, press a p-chord. 
          At the "Enter parameter" prompt, write a p.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Enter parity, None, Even, Odd".  When you write the first
          letter of a choice, the Braille 'n Speak simply confirms, "Okay"
          and leaves you back in your previous work area.
               4.1.2.3 Duplex
               This setting deserves special notice because it affects what
          you hear during a transmission as well as what exactly is being
          transmitted.
               There are three possible choices: Half duplex, Full duplex
          and None.  In the following discussion, we assume that your
          Braille 'n Speak is set to transmit data.  In other words, its
          serial port is "active", ready to send and receive data.
               When you set duplex to half, the default value, everything
          you write - your responses to prompts, for example - is stored in
          your currently open file as well as sent out the serial port to
          another device.  If you accidentally fail to press the spacebar
          when pressing a chord, a character (the non-chorded keys) is
          appended to the end of the text in your currently open file.
               When you set duplex to full, everything you write is sent
          out the port and nothing is stored in your currently open file. 
          There fore, full duplex is generally more desirable.  If you have
          your Braille 'n Speak connected to a computer, you'll usually
          want to set the Braille 'n Speak to full duplex mode.
               When you set duplex to none, what you write is stored in
          your currently open file but it is not transmitted to the other
          device.  This is most useful when transmitting a file from the
          Braille 'n Speak directly to a printer.  Otherwise, each time you
          send a carriage return or whenever the printer receives all it







          can handle, it might print before you are ready.
               Enter the Status menu and write a d to hear the current
          setting of duplex.  Change it by writing an f or an n.  Then exit
          The Status menu with the usual e-chord.
               Alternatively, enter the Parameters menu and write a d.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter duplex: half, full or none".  Enter
          a choice by writing its first letter and the Braille 'n Speak
          responds, "Okay", leaving you back in your currently open file.
               4.1.2.4 Data Bits
               The next setting to consider is the data length, or "data
          bits" setting.  The possible options are 7 and 8, with 8 being
          the most commonly used setting.
               To see the present status of data bits, enter the Status
          menu with an st-sign-chord and write a dots 4-5-6 character.  The
          Braille 'n Speak should say, "8 data bits".  You can change it,
          if necessary, by writing a dropped 7.  That is your only other
          option in this case.  The only time you need to worry about this
          setting at all is when the device at the other end requires a
          setting of 7 instead of 8 data bits.  Remember to exit the Status
          menu with an e-chord.
               To change the data bits setting from the Parameters menu,
          press a p-chord and at the "Enter parameter" prompt, write a dots
          4-5-6 character.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter data bits". 
          It assumes that you know your choices.  If you write an invalid
          entry, the Braille 'n Speak says, "Invalid input" and kicks you
          back into the file you were working.  To set a valid data bits
          setting, you must start the process over again. 
               4.1.2.5 Stop Bits
               This telecommunications setting has only two choices: 1 and
          2. Generally, devices require only 1 stop bit.
               To see which way the stop bits parameter is  presently set,
          enter the Status menu with an st-sign-chord and write an s.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "1 stop bit."  Change it to 2 if necessary
          by writing a dropped 2.  Exit the Status menu with an e-chord to
          return to the file in which you were working.
               Or, if you just want to change stop bits, press a p-chord to
          enter the Parameters menu.  At the prompt, write an s and the
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter stop bits".  As always, an invalid
          entry kicks you back into your currently open file.  To restart
          the process, you need to re-enter the Parameters menu.
               4.1.2.6 Handshaking
               Handshaking refers to a kind of traffic manager, telling one
          device to stop sending while the other deals with information it
          has received.  For example, if the Braille 'n Speak keeps sending
          to a printer which is not able to process the information coming
          into it, you could lose text.  So, handshaking keeps the flow of
          information on track.
               The three possible choices are None, Software handshaking
          and Hardware handshaking.  What's important here is to find out
          how the device you're communicating with wants to be set for this
          parameter and then to set the Braille 'n Speak to match it.
               Enter the Status menu with an st-sign-chord and write an h. 
          The Braille 'n Speak may say any one of the three choices,
          something like, "Software handshake".  To change it to one of the







          other two, simply write the first letter of a choice, for
          example, an n for None or an h for Hardware handshake.  Exit the
          Status menu with an e-chord.
               You may also set handshaking from the Parameters menu.  At
          the "Enter parameter" prompt, write an h.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Enter Hardware, Software or None".  Write the first letter
          of an option and the Braille 'n Speak responds, "Okay", leaving
          you back in your currently open file.
               When transmitting from a PC to the Braille 'n Speak, we
          recommend that you do not use the "None" handshake setting.  You
          will lose data if you do.
               Next, we'll look at a few parameters that affect how your
          data appears when transmitted and how your Braille 'n Speak is
          affect ed by transmission of data.  While you don't have to match
          these parameters both on the Braille 'n Speak end and the
          external device's end of the link, you should understand what
          these settings can do for you and how they can create potential
          snags if they're set incorrectly.
               4.1.2.7 The Interactive Mode
               Recall from Chapter 2 that, in order to have the Braille 'n
          Speak echo what you write, the Interactive mode must be "on". 
          The easiest way to enable or disable it is with a g-chord.  When
          you enable it, the Braille 'n Speak says, "Interactive, okay" and
          when you disable it, the Braille 'n Speak says, "Off, okay."
               To see the current status of Interactive mode, enter the
          Status menu and write a g.  The Braille 'n Speak tells you its
          status. Change it with a y (for on) and an n for off) and exit
          the Status menu with an e-chord.
               What does all this have to do with communications, you may
          be asking?
               When interactive mode is "on", text entering the Braille 'n
          Speak through its serial port (as well as its keyboard) is
          spoken. This can be especially vital when connected to a modem
          and a bulletin board, for example.  If you want to listen to
          everything as it is coming in, you can.  However, this slows down
          the whole transmission process.  Even with speech set to maximum
          speed, the Braille 'n Speak's voice lags behind the transmission. 
          On the other hand, having Interactive mode on means that you'll
          know when transmission has stopped or when you are being prompted
          by the other device.
               4.1.2.8 Rejecting Ornamentation
               This is the parameter that controls what kinds of characters
          are accepted as part of a transmission.  Computer networks can
          generate cute graphic characters (like smiley faces and Greek
          symbols, and even characters that draw boxes around text).  You
          can lock out such characters from ever intruding into your file.
          Most likely, all you want is the content in your Braille 'n
          Speak, not the fancy squiggles sighted readers find so aestheti
          cally pleasing.
               When you set the Reject Ornamentation parameter "on", the
          Braille 'n Speak effectively screens out strings of three or more
          spaces, stars, or any other characters that produce ornamentation
          in the text or affect the layout of the text in some way.
               To check the status of the Ornamentation parameter, enter







          the Status menu and write an o.  You change the setting on and
          off with a y or n.  Most of the time, you'll want to keep it
          "off" unless you're hooked up to a device that is constantly
          sending you extra stars and the like.
               You can also change this setting by pressing a p-chord to
          enter the Parameters menu.  Write an o and the Braille 'n Speak
          prompts, "Reject ornamentation characters; enter y or n." Respond
          according to your need at the time and you hear, "Okay", finding
          yourself back in your currently open file.
               Now that you have an elementary understanding of
          telecommunica tions settings and how to match them to the device
          you're linking with your Braille 'n Speak, you are ready to skip
          to the sections of this chapter that particularly interest you.
               4.2 THE PORTABLE DISK DRIVE
               Note: We spend no time here explaining standard computer
          terms - formatting a disk, operating system, textfile, etc.  We
          assume that you are familiar with these basic computer terms or
          have access to training on them.  Remember, our focus is on the
          Braille 'n Speak's interaction with other devices.  Turn to the
          appropriate manuals for detailed explanations of terms that apply
          specifically to those devices.
               The portable disk drive is the Braille 'n Speak's passport
          to the world of computers.  It lets you interact with standard
          3-1/2 inch disks formatted for an MS DOS (IBM PC compatible)
          computer.
               You can load text documents (ASCII textfiles) into the
          Braille 'n Speak, read them, edit them, even transfer them back
          onto disks. You can load programs specially written for the
          Braille 'n Speak - such as the scientific calculator and
          spellchecker - adding even more power to your unit.  You can ask
          for the listing of the contents of a disk (a directory), format a
          disk (prepare it to receive information), delete files on the
          disk, create new ones, etc.
               4.2.1 The Physical Design of the Disk Drive
               The disk drive can read and format either 720K
               or 1.44MB disks.  When you command the drive to format a
          disk, it determines whether the disk is high or low density and
          formats accordingly.
               The disk drive  connects to the Braille 'n Speak's second
          port, the one closest to you on the left side of the unit.  A
          cable comes with the drive
               when you purchase it.
               Position the drive with the slot where the disk goes facing
          toward you.  Rest the unit on a flat, stable surface like a desk.
          Now look at the back of the device.  Starting from the left, the
          first thing you find is a rocker switch which powers the disk
          drive.  It comes in the "Off" position from the factory, rocked
          to the right.  To turn on the disk drive, you rock it to the
          left.  But you can't do that yet.
               To the right of the power switch is the jack for your AC
          adapter that also comes with the disk drive at the time of
          purchase.  The drive can be operated from its internal batery,
          much like the Braille 'n Speak, and it should be fully charged
          when you pur chase it.  Nevertheless, you might want to plug your







          AC adapter into the unit the first time you run the drive.  The
          battery in the disk drive is identical to the battery in the
          Braille 'n Speak.  In fact, the two battery chargers are
          interchangeable. The disk drive needs only eight hours to attain
          a full recharge.
               Furthest to the right along the back of the disk drive is
          the female serial port that connects the disk drive to the
          Braille 'n Speak.  The cable must be connected to this port in
          order for the disk drive to power up.  If you try to turn on the
          unit without first inserting the cable into this port, nothing
          will happen and you may think that you have a defective device on
          your hands.
               To plug the cable into the disk drive, align the end of the
          cable that has the screws on either side to the port and press
          until you feel the cable mate with the port.  You may have to
          turn the cable 180 degrees around before the cable and the port
          merge.  Do not force the cable.  When it is properly aligned, it
          will fit snugly.  Turn the screws clockwise to secure the
          connection.
               Now connect the small end of the cable to the port closest
          to you on the left side of the Braille 'n Speak as you hold it
          facing toward you.  On this end of the cable notice that the
          little square connector has a single dot on one side and two on
          the other.  Hold the connector with the single dot pointing up as
          you insert it into the port on the Braille 'n Speak and you'll
          find that when you gently press, the connector mates easily with
          the port.
               Next, let's turn on the disk drive.  You will hear three
          distinct tones from the unit to indicate that it is active.
               Insert the disk that came with the disk drive into the slot
          in the front of the machine with the braille side up and the
          braille characters facing away from you.  The disk should click
          into place and a small, square button to the right of the slot
          should pop out toward you.  When you're ready to extract this
          disk from the drive, simply push that button in and the disk will
          pop out.
               Mostly, you will be storing files from the Braille 'n Speak
          onto disk and retrieving files from disk onto the Braille 'n
          Speak. We'll go through examplse of each type of transmission.
               4.2.2 Retrieving a File from Disk
               The first thing you need to do is to create a space in the
          Braille 'n Speak to receive the incoming file.  But how do you
          know what size to make it and what if you make it too small?
          Won't you lose some of the text in the file or couldn't you end
          up with a huge, empty space wasted in your Braille 'n Speak?
               If you know the size of a file in bytes (and remember that a
          Braille 'n Speak "page" holds up to 4,096 characters), you can
          then "guestimate" how many Braille 'n Speak "pages" are required
          for a file.  But if you guess wrong, you're still okay, as you'll
          see.  Let's go through a simple, concrete example of retrieving
          an existing file from the disk that came with the drive.
               Create a file called "disk" six Braille 'n Speak pages long
          with braille translation turned off.  Once in this file, press an
          s- chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Storage".  Now write an l







          and at the prompt "Load, enter filename", write the word "disk".
          Press an e-chord to start the transmission.
               You'll hear some clicks from the disk drive and some hissing
          noises from the Braille 'n Speak.  Within a very short time, the
          Braille 'n Speak will say, "File is full" and, if Interactive
          mode is on, it will start speaking the text of the file.
               Shut up the Braille 'n Speak by writing a dots 4-5-6-chord
          to go to the end of the file.  Check how much room you have left
          with an r-chord.  You should hear something like, "Room left is
          11."
               You can read this file in the usual way.  Go ahead and do
          that now, moving to the top of the file and either listening to
          the complete text or skipping around in the file.
               Do you have the complete file saved on the Braille 'n Speak?
          Well, one way to find out is to read the current line at the end
          of the file with a c-chord.  In the current example, you'll hear
          something like, "by R".  Doesn't sound like the end of a docu
          ment, does it.
               Actually, the disk drive emits a single tone when it
          completes sending a file to the Braille 'n Speak and the Braille
          'n Speak itself says, "Okay".  Since this did not happen, we can
          assume that there is more text in the file that has not yet been
          trans mitted since the Braille 'n Speak ran out of room.  The
          disk drive is smart enough to know when the Braille 'n Speak
          can't take any more data and stops sending text.
               Let's see how to continue getting more of the file from the
          disk drive.  
               The first thing to do is to make this file bigger, say by 1
          Braille 'n Speak page.  When your file is larger by a full
          Braille 'n Speak page, go to its end and press an s-chord.  At
          the "Storage" prompt from the Braille 'n Speak, write an r (for
          resume).  This time, the disk drive should emit a single tone
          indicating that it has completed sending this file and the
          Braille 'n Speak should say, "Okay" to acknowledge that it has
          received a complete file.  Proceed as before, reading this file
          in the usual way.
               Incidentally, you've probably noticed a couple of tones from
          the disk drive every few minutes.  Don't worry; it's the drive's
          way of reminding you that it is still turned on, just as the
          Braille 'n Speak has a Power Reminder feature that says "Hello"
          when you have left it inactive for a few minutes.
               Now, how about if we want to save a file onto disk from the
          Braille 'n Speak.
               4.2.3 Storing a File from the Braille 'n Speak to the Disk
          Drive
               There are several ways to save a file from the Braille 'n
          Speak to a disk.  Three common methods include: saving a file
          merely for backup purposes; saving a file as a "print" file ready
          for a printer or word processor to handle; saving a file as a
          "braille" file ready to send to a braille embosser. 
               The simplest way to save a file from the Braille 'n Speak to
          a disk - mostly used for backup purposes - is to press an s-chord
          from within the file and at the "Storage" prompt, write an s (for
          save).  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Save; enter filename".  Name







          the file using MS DOS file naming conventions and press an e-
          chord.  The disk drive spins and the Braille 'n Speak hisses and
          clicks.  Shortly, a single tone from the disk drive followed by
          an "Okay" from the Braille 'n Speak tell you that your transfer
          was successful.
               You can check whether braille translation is turned on or
          off by checking its status in the Status menu, but the "Storage"
          utility we've just discussed facilitates how you store a file. 
          You don't have to think about which way your braille translator
          is current ly set.
               From within the file you want to save, press an s-chord.  At
          the "Storage" prompt, write a t to save the file translated from
          Grade 2 braille into normal, English text (a textfile), or a b to
          save the file as a Grade 2 braille file to be printed on a
          braille embosser or sent out to a braille display device.  For
          clarity, you might answer the "Enter filename" prompt with
          "filename.txt" for "print" files and with "filename.brl" for
          "braille" files.
               The Braille 'n Speak goes through its usual clicks and
          hisses and the disk drive spins.  Your transfer is complete when
          you hear, "Okay" from the Braille 'n Speak and a single tone from
          the drive.
               A note of caution:
               We have not talked about the issue of physical format of the
          page.  This refers to the page length, line width, margins, etc.
          Before you save a textfile as a "print" or "braille" file which
          you intend to send to a printer or braille embosser, you must set
          up the appropriate page format for the file.  Otherwise, your
          file is translated into print or Grade 2 braille but its page
          format may be a mess.  Turn to Section 4.3.3 to read about format
          parameters in detail.  If you go through our example, you'll see
          a step-by-step explanation.
               Whether you're transmitting an application or a textfile to
          or from the disk drive, or perhaps a group of files, here's
          another transmission method that is more sophisticated than the
          s-chord command.
               ** 4.2.4 Transmitting Textfiles or Applications
               Note: This feature is unique to the 640 and your disk drive
          may require updating to be able to perform the type of
          transmission described below.  Contact Blazie Engineering for
          more details.)
               First, let's take a look at how this optional transmission
          process works, regardless of the type of file being transferred.
          In the next section, we'll deal specifically with transferring
          "programs" or "applications" to the Braille 'n Speak.
               Enter the Files menu and press a t-chord (for transfer a
          file). The Braille 'n Speak sees that the disk drive is connected
          and prompts you with, "Disk drive, enter s to send or r to
          receive." If you press an s-chord or an r-chord, you will hear
          the names of the files as they are being transmitted.  If you
          simply write an s or an r, you do not hear their names as they
          are being trans mitted.
               ** 4.2.4.1 Sending Files to the Disk Drive
               Note: This feature is unique to the 640.







               When you write an s to send files to the drive, the Braille
          'n Speak prompts you with the name of the file to which you're
          cur rently pointing in your file list and tells you whether that
          file is "marked".  Marking the Braille 'n Speak files you want to
          send prepares them for transmission.
               You can navigate through your file list to hear whether each
          file is marked or unmarked.  If you don't want the file you're
          point ing to sent to the disk drive, you can unmark it with an n. 
          Then you can move through your file list unmarking files with an
          n: forward with a dot 4-chord or backward with a dot 1-chord, to
          the beginning and end of the file list with an l-chord and dots
          4-5- 6-chord as usual.
               When you find a file you do want to send, write a y to
          "mark" it for sending.  Likewise, if you had marked a file
          previously that you don't want to send at this time you can
          unmark it with an n.
               A quicker way to mark and unmark files as you move through
          your file list is this: When you find a file you want to mark,
          press a y-chord to mark the file. This automati ally moves you to
          the next file in your file list.
               Finally, if you want to send all the files in your Braille
          'n Speak file list, write an m to mark them all at once.  You can
          write a u to "unmark" your entire file list all at once and
          select individual files to send.
               Another way to use the marking feature is with "wildcard"
          charac ters.  (See Appendix A.)  Press an m-chord or u-chord to
          mark or unmark a specific group of files that have similar names. 
          For example, say that you have several files with names like,
          "names.brl" and "books.brl".  Press an m-chord followed by the
          characters "*.brl" (that's an asterisk, a period, then the
          letters brl).  All files with names that end in ".brl" are marked
          for sending to the drive.  Similarly, a u-chord followed by
          "*.brl" unmarks that group of files so that they are not sent.
               By the way, pressing the spacebar toggles between marking
          and unmarking the file to which you are currently pointing also.
               When you've marked all the files you want to send to the
          drive, press an e-chord to let the Braille 'n Speak start sending
          files. You hear the drive spin and nothing much from your Braille
          'n Speak until it finishes sending.  Then it prompts you with
          "Okay, enter file command."
               Remember, you started this process from within your Files
          menu; the Braille 'n Speak knows that.  So it leaves you there
          when it completes the transmission.
               ** 4.2.4.2 Receiving Files from the Disk Drive
               Note: This feature is unique to the 640.
               When you write an r to receive files from the drive, the
          Braille 'n Speak prompts, "Enter filename" and waits for you to
          write the name of a known file on the disk in the drive or a
          group of similarly named files.  Press an e-chord to let the
          Braille 'n Speak start receiving.  You may use wildcard
          characters for similarly named groups of files, as illustrated
          above.
               A note of caution: If you have a file in the Braille 'n
          Speak with the same name as the one you are receiving from your







          drive, the Braille 'n Speak asks you whether you want to delete
          the one in the Braille 'n Speak.  If you answer, "Yes", it will
          be deleted and replaced by the incoming file.  If you answer,
          "No", the transfer is aborted altogether.
               After you press the e-chord to signal the Braille 'n Speak
          to begin receiving files from the drive, you should hear the
          drive spin and eventually the Braille 'n Speak say, "Okay". 
          Files from the drive are appended to the end of your previous
          Braille 'n Speak file list.
               Next, let's see how to receive a file that is a program or
          appli cation, not a textfile.
               4.2.4.3 Adding an Application to the Braille 'n Speak
               Up to now, we've been talking exclusively about sending and
          receiving textfiles - that is, files with text you can read in
          them.  As you may know, the other type of file a computer uses is
          a "program", a file that instructs the computer on how to do
          something, like run a word processor or a spreadsheet applica
          tion.  For the most part, you can't run applications in the
          Braille 'n Speak other than those we've discussed: the calcula
          tor, the calendar, and so on.  But there are a few exceptions as
          we'll see - for example, the spellchecker.
               You can send to the Braille 'n Speak an application - or
          binary file - using the Transfer command just described.  We'll
          use the scientific calculator as our example.
               Assuming that you have the disk that came with your drive
          still in the drive, from the Files menu, press a t-chord as
          before. This time, answer with an r.  The Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Enter filename."  Respond, "calc.bns".   The Braille 'n Speak
          recogniz es files with ".bns" extensions as programs.  Press an
          e-chord. The disk drive spins and eventually the Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Okay".
               Obviously, if the file is not on the disk, you hear an error
          mes sage.  As you'll see in a minute, you can check what files
          are on a disk.  For now, we'll assume that things worked fine and
          you have the file in your Braille 'n Speak.  Go to the end of
          your files   list to see the name of the last file.  You should
          hear, "File number x, calc.bns, external program" (where x is the
          number of the file in your file list).  The Braille 'n Speak
          knows that this file is not a textfile.  Open the file but when
          you try to read its contents, you'll hear gibberish.  That's
          because this file is intended to be "run" like you run your
          calendar, and not "read" like you read your address file.  To run
          this special calculator program, you'll need to read the documen
          tation about it that is also on the disk that came with your
          drive.  You might want to transfer that file, a textfile called
          "calc.doc", into your Braille 'n Speak so that you have instruc
          tions on how to run this scientific calculator program.
               When you're ready to run the program, simply press an
          o-chord to get into the Options menu, then write an x.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter program to execute".  When you
          write "calc", fol lowed by an e-chord, the Braille 'n Speak loads
          the program and is ready for you to work within it.
               The Braille 'n Speak recognizes files with the ".bns"
          extension as external programs and automatically write-protects







          them. Files with extensions .bin, .bns, .com, .dic, .exe, and
          .sys, are also write-protected, automatically.  You can delete
          such files, but you cannot write in them.
               If you're not ready to explore the scientific calculator,
          delete it at this time, or save it for when you're more
          comfortable with your unit's overall features.
               4.2.5 Reading the Directory from a Disk
               We will go over the directory command since you must know
          what's on a disk to use it effectively.  But we will not spend
          time describing all of the commands that you can use with the
          disk drive - such as Format a disk, or Kill a file on disk. 
          These commands assume an understanding of MS DOS.  They all begin
          with the s-chord and are followed by the first letter of the
          command. For example, s-chord followed by k is the command for
          "killing" a file on disk.  A list of disk drive functions is in
          the Braille 'n Speak Help file and in Appendix B.
               From anywhere within a file on the Braille 'n Speak you can
          issue the command for reading a disk directory.  Press an s-chord
          fol lowed by a d.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Directory; enter
          file name".  If you're looking for a specific file on the disk
          whose name you know, or a specific group of files whose names all
          end with, say, "bns", you may write that filename (or a filename
          with wildcard characters) at this prompt.  Then press an e-chord.
          However, if you just want a full list of files on this disk,
          press an e-chord at the prompt without specifying a filename. 
               Momentarily, the Braille 'n  Speak will have received the
          direc tory, and if Interactive mode is on, it will start saying,
          "Volume label is ..." and begin listing files.  Is this list
          being transmitted into your currently open file?  No.  Luckily,
          the Clipboard - that scratchpad area that holds things for you in
          the Braille 'n Speak - is receiving the directory list.  You can
          read through it from the Clipboard file as you read any other
          text.
               As you read the directory of the disk that came with your
          drive, notice a special file, the spellchecker.  If you decide to
          load it into your Braille 'n Speak, you'll have much more power
          than ever before.  We look at the spellchecker in detail next.
               ** 4.2.6 The Spellchecker
               The spellchecker application provided on the disk that came
          with your drive, called "spell.dic", takes up 86 Braille 'n Speak
          pages.  Therefore, this section is for 640 users who can afford
          that much space as a "dictionary".  On the other hand, think of
          the advantage of having a dictionary always at your fingertips.
               The spellchecker is not  a true dictionary as you might
          think. Rather, it is a program that checks your files for
          spelling errors and provides you with a thesaurus of sorts - a
          set of optional words for the misspelled words it finds.  It also
          allows you to create a secondary, personal "dictionary" with
          words that are spelled correctly but are not included in the
          spellchecker.
               Let's step through the process of loading the Spellchecker
          into the Braille 'n Speak.
               First, check that you have enough room in your Braille 'n
          Speak. From the Files menu, write an f (for Free space).  If you







          hear that you have more than 86 Braille 'n Speak pages free, you
          can load the spellchecker.
               Now press a t-chord from within the Files menu.  The Braille
          'n Speak says, "Disk drive; enter s to send or r to receive." 
          We're receiving a file into the Braille 'n Speak, so write an r. 
          The prompt is, "Enter filename."  Write "spell.dic" and press an
          e- chord.  Now just sit back and wait.  You'll hear the disk
          drive spin, the Braille 'n Speak click and hiss, and after a few
          minutes, a single tone from the disk drive and an "Okay" prompt
          from the Braille 'n Speak.  Should you hear anything else, like,
          "Storage device missing", check your connections and make sure
          that the drive is turned on and has sufficient charge to be
          active.
               You won't be able to read the "spell.dic" file like a
          textfile. It's written in machine code, remember, because it is a
          program. Let's see how to run it.
               To enter the Spellcheck menu, from within your currently
          open file, press an o-chord to get into the Options menu.  Now
          write a ch-sign (dots 1-6).  The Braille 'n Speak prompts you
          with, "Spellcheck what?"
               You have choices about what you want to look up.  Write a w
          for the current word where your cursor is resting or a z for your
          entire document starting from your current cursor location.  If
          you want to spellcheck the entire document, make sure your cursor
          is at the top of the file.  If you decide to discontinue spell
          checking the document, you can abort the process with the usual
          z-chord.  The document will be spellchecked to the point where
          you aborted the process.
               When a word is not found, you've either spelled it
          incorrectly - it doesn't match a word in the spellchecker - or it
          may not be a word found in a standard dictionary, like a proper
          name.  In such a case, the spellchecker has options for you.
               If the Braille 'n Speak says, "Not found" and spells out the
          word in question, it then presents you with a set of options.
               4.2.6.1 Adding a Word
               Choose Option a for adding a word to a "custom" dictionary. 
          (By the way, your custom dictionary is placed in a separate file
          called "personal.dic".)  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Okay" and
          keeps searching the file for other misspellings.
               4.2.6.2 Bypassing the Word for the Rest of the Document
               Suppose you have "XYZ" in a file.  This is the way you want
          to spell this "word". You don't want to add it to a personalized
          dictionary and you don't want to have the spellchecker continue
          to warn you every time it finds it.  Choose Option b from the
          spellchecker menu and the word is bypassed for the remainder of
          the spellcheck process.
               4.2.6.3 Reading a Word in Context
               What if you're not sure whether a word is correct but you
          would be if you could hear surrounding text.  This might be true
          of an abbreviation or acronym.  Choose Option c to hear the word
          spoken as part of the current line of text in your file.
               4.2.6.4 Correcting a Word
               If you realize that the word is spelled wrong, choose Option
          e. The Braille 'n Speak prompts you to, "Enter correct word." 







          When you've written it, press an e-chord and the Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Okay", confirming that it has replaced the word for you in
          the file.  Then it continues to spellcheck the document.
               4.2.6.5 Repeat a Word
               Let's say that you're not sure what spelling the Braille 'n
          Speak gave you for the word in question.  Choose Option r to have
          the word spoken and spelled again.  Press dots 3-6-chord to have
          the word spelled out phonetically.
               4.2.6.6 Getting Help
               If you get stuck and can't recall the options available to
          you in the spellchecker, choose Option h to hear the options
          spoken again.
               4.2.6.7 Overlooking a Word    
               If you decide that the word that the spellchecker thinks is
          wrong is really okay, but you do want this word checked
          throughout the rest of the document, choose Option o.
               4.2.6.8 Suggested Replacement Words
               If you think you might have chosen a better word or you want
          to hear possible spellings for the word, the spellchecker
          provides you with its best guesses of what it thinks you meant to
          spell. Choose Option s.  The spellchecker lists several
          possibilities:
               Move back a choice with dot 1-chord and forward a choice
          with dot 4-chord. to the top of the suggestion list with l-chord
          and to the end of it with a dots 4-5-6-chord.  Writing a c reads
          you the current choice.  E-chord replaces the incorrect word with
          the current choice.  To leave this submenu without choosing a re
          placement word, simply abort it with a z-chord.
               A note of caution: While the spellchecker can check through
          a Grade 2 braille file, when it replaces a word in such a file,
          it does so in computer braille.  In other words, if the
          replacement word is, say, "word", you will find that it is
          spelled out, not contracted, in your braille file.  While this
          does not affect the reading of the text, it may affect your
          ability to search for that word later.  You could look for the
          contracted version of the word for a long time and never find it.
               The spellchecker does take up a considerable amount of
          Braille 'n Speak space, but if you write a great deal with the
          Braille 'n Speak or have no other word processor at your
          disposal, it can be a lifesaver to be able to produce perfectly
          spelled documents.
               And speaking of printers and other computers, we turn to
          them next.
               4.3 PRINTERS, MODEMS, AND COMPUTERS
               Let's remind you at this time that when you get your Braille
          'n Speak from the factory, it is preset for 9600 Baud, 8 data
          bits, 1 stop bit, no parity, half duplex and software
          handshaking.  If you're unfamiliar with these terms and don't
          know what your other device wants to see for these settings, we
          strongly recommend that you stop here and review Section 4.1.2
          before continuing. It might save you countless hours the first
          time you try to hook up the Braille 'n Speak to another device.
               And while we're about it, if you have not looked at the
          section on cables (Section 4.1.1), we suggest that you take a







          minute to skim over that section as well.  Wrong cables account
          for a considerable amount of technical support questions and
          unneces sary frustration.
               Now let's talk about a couple of settings on the Braille 'n
          Speak that we deliberately left out of Section 4.1.2.
               4.3.1 Serial Port Active
               To conserve power, the serial port on the Braille 'n Speak
          is normally turned off.  Before you can communicate with any
          exter nal device through this port, you must activate it.  Note
          that the longer the serial port is active, the greater the drain
          on the Braille 'n Speak's battery.  Don't think anything is wrong
          with the battery if only after seven hours of use you start
          getting "Battery low" warning messages.  If you've made heavy use
          of the port, the battery drains quickly.
               There is no warning to you as you're writing in a file, say,
          whether the serial port is active.  Your only warning is that
          when you first turn on the Braille 'n Speak, if the serial port
          is active, the start-up message says, "Serial port active,
          Braille 'n Speak ready ..."  So it's important to turn off the
          serial port immediately upon completing communications with
          another device to save battery power.
               Of course, there is a way to check whether the port is
          active. Enter the Status menu with an st-sign-chord and write an
          f.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Serial port active, off."  To
          turn it on, write a y.  To turn it off later, write an n.
               Another way to change the status of the serial port is
          through the Parameters menu.  Press a p-chord.  At the "Enter
          parameter" prompt, write a dots 2-6-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak
          says, "Serial port active, enter y or n".  Whatever your choice,
          the Braille 'n Speak may only squeak in response,  although most
          of the time, you'll hear the confirming prompt, "Okay{".
               This setting is hard to change on purpose to avoid
          accidental activation of the serial port.
               4.3.2 Appending Linefeeds
               Back in Chapter 2 we explained the difference between a
          carriage return and a linefeed and why it is that you don't
          really need to have linefeeds present in your files on the
          Braille 'n Speak. Let's revisit this briefly to see how it
          applies to our present discussion on transmitting text.
               A carriage return in effect moves the cursor to the left
          margin of a line.  In the Braille 'n Speak, it doesn't affect
          your reading because you are not physically moving up and down a
          piece of paper to read.  So the carriage return serves as a
          marker more than anything else.
               A linefeed, on the other hand, moves the cursor to the next
          line on the page.  Once again, in a Braille 'n Speak file, having
          linefeeds is meaningless because you're not physically moving
          vertically along a piece of paper.  However, clearly, this
          changes when you print the contents of a Braille 'n Speak file.
          Now you need to have both carriage returns and linefeeds present
          in the file.  Otherwise, a printer will simply print the first
          line of text, then return the carriage to the left margin and
          print the next line, and the next and the next, without ever
          moving down the page.  And you can guess what a mess you'll have







          - a jumble of letters all on the same line.  (Actually, some
          printers refuse to cooperate if they don't see pairs of carriage
          returns and linefeeds and don't print at all.)  Luckily, there's
          a provision built into the Braille 'n Speak to deal with this.
               Enter the Status menu with the st-sign-chord.  Write an a. 
          The Braille 'n Speak says something like, "Append linefeed when
          transmitting, off".  Turn this parameter "on" with a y and "off"
          with an n.  Unless you're transmitting, you'll want it off.
               Next, let's see how to set up page format parameters so that
          your printouts will look just right.
               4.3.3 Physical Page Format Considerations
               When sending text directly to a printer, braille embosser,
          or to a computer, you want your text to look right in that
          environment. In other words, if the text is going to a printer,
          you probably want the page length to be 66 lines and the margins
          to be 5 spaces from the left and right edges of the paper, etc. 
          If the text is going to a braille embosser, on the other hand, no
          doubt you'll want something like a page length of 25 lines and a
          line width of 40 characters and Grade 2 braille.  These format
          issues can be controlled from your Braille 'n Speak simply by
          setting certain parameters.  You don't have to do anything fancy
          as you're writing your file.
               Let's take these formatting parameters one at a time.
               4.3.3.1 Double-Spacing
               If you want to print a double spaced document,
               press an st-sign-chord to enter the Status menu. Write an
          ar-sign (dots 3-4-5) to get to the Double space status, usually
          turned off.  Turn it on by writing a y and off when you're
          through transmitting the file by writing an n.  Exit the Status
          menu with an e-chord.
               4.3.3.2 Page Length, Line Width, and Margins
               You must set the margins, the width of your lines, and the
          page length for each file you want to transmit.  Consider whether
          you're sending the text to a printer or to a braille embosser.
          Let's look at each of these settings separately.  Each is set
          from the Status menu.  You can cycle through the settings by
          pressing dot 1-chords and dot 4-chords to move forward and
          backward through them.  The default parameters are all set to 0.
               Get into the Status menu and write an l (for line length). 
          The Braille 'n Speak says something like, "Line length 0".  We'll
          assume that the current file is going to be printed, rather than
          brailled.  So let's change the line length to 65, a commonly used
          print line width.  Write 65 (using dropped numbers as always) and
          press an e-chord to enter your change.  You should now hear,
          "Line length 65".
               Press a dot 4-chord to look at the next setting, the left
          margin. The Braille 'n Speak says, "Left margin 0".  Let's change
          that to 5 and then press an e-chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Left margin 5."
               Press another dot 4-chord and you'll hear, "Page length 0." 
          We define page length to be the number of lines that can
          physically fit on the paper, not the number of lines you want
          printed on each piece of paper.  Therefore, in most cases, we
          suggest a page length of 66 lines.  Go ahead and enter a 66 and







          press an e- chord.  The Braille 'n Speak says, "Page length 66".
               Press another dot 4-chord.  You hear "Top margin 0".  Most
          of the time you'll want a margin of 5 at the top and bottom of
          your page.  So let's change this to 5 and press an e-chord.  The
          Braille 'n Speak says, "Top margin 5".
               Press another dot 4-chord.
               Now you hear something about "window length".  You need not
          concern yourself with this parameter.  We're done.  If you want
          to review the settings you've changed, simply cycle back through
          them with dot 1-chords.  Exit the Status menu with an e-chord.
               You're almost ready to transmit your file as a "print" file
          but there is one more thing to consider.
               4.3.3.3 Numbering Pages
               The Braille 'n Speak can number your pages.  You can have
          your pages numbered in a print format for "print" files or a
          braille format for "braille" files.  As long as your page format
          parame ters are set properly for print or braille page
          dimensions, page numbering will work right when you transmit
          text.  You need to turn page-numbering on, though, if you want it
          to be in effect.
               Get into the Status menu and write a number-sign (dots
          3-4-5-6). The Braille 'n Speak says something like, "number
          pages, off". Turn this setting "on" with a y or "off" with an n.
               An added bonus of having the page-numbering parameter on is
          that you can check how long your file is going to be before you
          actually print or braille it on physical paper.  Again, it's
          essential to set up your page format parameters before using the
          following command to check how many pages you have in your file.
          If you have not done so, issuing the command results in a mes
          sage, "No page format set". 
               Note: When you set page parameters in the Classic, the
          settings are true for "every" file in your Braille 'n Speak. 
          This may result in incorrect page dimensions for files requiring
          a differ ent format.  You must always check page format
          parameters in your currently open file before you transmit it to
          a printer or braille embosser to ensure that settings match your
          expectations.
               Let's look at an example.
               Suppose you have a file that has 500 characters of text in
          it and it's all in Grade 2 braille.  We can't be exactly sure how
          many print or braille pages that file turns into without knowing
          how many blank lines you have and how many carriage returns you
          physically put into the file.  But even beyond that, if you set
          your page format parameters for "print" with say, 66 lines per
          page and 65 characters per line, when the Braille 'n Speak counts
          the number of pages it will determine a very different number
          than if you had set your page format parameters to a page length
          of 25 and a line length of 40, as for a braille file.  The whole
          business can be confusing but a way to stay on top of it is to be
          clear as to whether the file is a "braille" or "print" file and
          to check your page format parameters before checking how many
          physical pages will be printed or brailled and certainly before
          transmitting the file itself.
               Once you've determined that your page format parameters are







          set properly, you can exit the Status  menu with the usual
          e-chord. Now you're back in your file.  From anywhere in your
          file you can see where you would physically be on the actual
          piece of paper if you were reading the text from it instead of
          from your Braille 'n Speak.  Let's assume that your file has 500
          characters in it. You could go to the end of the file with a dot
          4-5-6-chord and then press wh-sign-chord to see where the cursor
          is.  Then press an sh-sign-chord (dots 1-4-6).  The Braille 'n
          Speak says, "Please wait" and hisses for a couple of seconds. 
          Eventually, it says something like, "Page 2, line 17".  So now
          you know that when you actually print out this file, it will
          contain two pages and the second of the two will be only about a
          third of the way full of text.
               We suggest that you try a few test runs setting up page
          format parameters and using the page-numbering setting as trials
          before you actually trust that things will be transmitted as you
          expect. All printers and braille embossers, especially printers,
          have quirks that may require different values than we recommend
          for the settings.  Nevertheless, once you get these page format
          issues under control, you'll be transmitting near-perfectly
          formatted documents all the time.  It's a matter of practice.
               Now we'll turn to the business of how to actually transmit
          blocks of text from the Braille 'n Speak to another device.
               4.3.4 Sending Blocks of Text to Another Device
               In this section, we deal specifically with sending blocks of
          text from the Braille 'n Speak to another device, such as a
          printer. You can, of course, use the commands discussed here to
          transmit blocks of text to other devices as well.  But look at
          Section 4.3.6 for more sophisticated ways to transmit files to
          and from computers.
               Naturally, a block of text can be a whole file.  But it can
          just as easily be less than that.  When you're sending blocks of
          text directly from the Braille 'n Speak to a printer, you must
          choose the format (braille or print), things like page length,
          line width and page numbering.  Formatting the text from the
          Braille 'n Speak is less important if you intend to edit the text
          with a word processor after you've sent that text to a computer. 
          But certainly with direct output to a printer, you want your
          format to be just right.
               If you're sending text directly to a computer, it is best to
          utilize a telecommunications program on the computer to facili
          tate adjusting telecommunications settings to match those on the
          Braille 'n Speak and to perform error-checking during the trans
          mission.  We won't recommend a specific telecommunications
          package, but you'll find several shareware versions that work
          well with speech synthesizers and screen access programs.  For
          our discussion, we'll assume that you have such a program and are
          familiar with its use.
               Remember to address those essential, physical page format
          parameter considerations before you send text to a printer or you
          may find the resulting printout very strange indeed.
               Now, let's go through the mechanics of the process of
          sending blocks of text from the Braille 'n Speak to another
          device.







               You can send text from the Braille 'n Speak to another
          device in the following ways: the entire file, a single line,
          paragraph or a block of text.  Each of these options starts with
          a t-chord. Writing a certain letter after the "Enter transmit
          parameter" prompt sends the desired amount of text to the other
          device.
               Sending the entire file, a line, or paragraph is
          straightforward. When you're ready to send text from your
          currently open file, place your cursor where you want the
          transmission to begin, then press a t-chord.  The Braille 'n
          Speak says, "Enter transmit parameter".  Write an l, p, or z to
          indicate whether you are sending from the current cursor position
          to the end of the current line (l), paragraph (p), or entire text
          (z).
               To send a block of text, that does not extend to the end of
          the file, you need to define the block.  Before issuing the
          t-chord, you must "mark" the block to be transmitted.  Find the
          final character you want to include in your transmission.  Move
          beyond it one character with a dot 6-chord.  Enter an m-chord.
          Then move to your starting point, the first character you want to
          include in your transmission.
               Now that you have defined the block to transmit, press a
          t-chord. At the "Enter transmit parameter" prompt, write an m. 
          All the text from your current cursor location to the mark which
          you just set is transmitted.
               The commands t-chord a, t-chord b, and t-chord s reduce the
          number of steps you need to perform in order to transmit text.
               t-chord a automatically moves the cursor to the beginning of
          your file and transmits everything within that file.  Any format
          conditions you have in effect are honored: margins, line and page
          length, etc.
               t-chord b sends text from the beginning to the end of the
          file but it turns off the braille translator.  It is the command
          of choice to transmit text directly to a braille embosser.  Any
          format values you may have set are in effect.  If page numbering
          is on, braille pages are included in the printout in literary
          braille notation.
               t-chord s performs steps which are essential if you want to
          send "clean" text to a device for backup purposes only.  (It does
          not work with the disk drive, however.)  If you want no format
          considerations, no braille translation, and all of your text
          sent, then use t-chord s.  It sends your cursor to the beginning
          of the file, turns off the braille translator if it is on, and
          sets all format parameters to 0 before transmitting the entire
          file.
               Those are the different ways to send blocks of text from the
          Braille 'n Speak to another device.  In Section 4.3.6 we'll
          examine a more sophisticated set of commands to transmit files.
               4.3.5 Modems and Other Computers
               Modems are special devices that link two computers together
          through the telephone line.  You hook up a computer to your phone
          line by connecting the computer first to the modem and then the
          modem to the phone jack (or to the phone itself).  The computer
          you're calling is similarly linked to a phone line through a







          modem.
               We won't spend time on how modems work.  These devices, too,
          have manuals which describe their setup and detail the commands
          to which they respond.  For example, you can tell a modem to dial
          a phone either by tones or by dial pulses, to dial 9 first, wait
          for a specified period before dialing the rest of the remote
          phone number, to answer the telephone when it rings and on which
          ring to answer, etc.
               The computer on your end of such a connection could easily
          be your Braille 'n Speak.
               If you have a computer and want to transmit data between it
          and your Braille 'n Speak, you need to run a telecommunications
          program in that computer.  This program sets up the computer to
          receive information from an outside source, in this case your
          Braille 'n Speak.  As with printers, having the correct cable
          goes a long way toward making things easy.
               (Blazie Engineering has telecommunications programs for the
          IBM PC and simple file capture programs for both the IBM PC
          compati ble and the Apple families of computers.  Also, there are
          several shareware products that work well with screen access
          programs.)
               In addition, Blazie has programs that normally come with our
          external disk drive - such as the spellchecker and the scientific
          calculator.  Since these programs come on an MS DOS compatible 3-
          1/2 inch floppy disk, those of you not having a disk drive can
          still take advantage of these programs by loading them into your
          Braille 'n Speak from a PC.  Check with Blazie for information on
          how to obtain any of these programs.)
               Now let's see how to connect the Braille 'n Speak to other
          devices.  To link your Braille 'n Speak to a modem, to another
          Braille 'n Speak, and to some computers (like some Apple models),
          you need a "null modem" cable or adapter.  As we mentioned in
          Section 4.1.1, matching up the right cables really smoothes your
          connectivity challenges.  Make sure you get a null modem cable
          with the right attributes to match your Braille 'n Speak cable
          and the serial port on your modem or computer.  (The manual that
          comes with your computer should indicate whether you need one and
          certainly the dealer that sold it to you should be able to
          provide this information.)
               We'll focus on the IBM PC compatible since it is the
          computer of choice for most visually-impaired users and it does
          not require a null modem cable.
               Assuming that you have connected the cables properly and
          that you have a telecommunications  program running in your PC,
          you should be all set to transmit data.
               One last thing: before you start attempting to transmit
          data, remember to make sure that your telecommunications settings
          match (Baud rate, parity, data bits, stop bits, duplex and
          handshak ing).  In Section 4.1.2 we detailed all of these for you
          and explained how to change them if necessary on your Braille 'n
          Speak.  Naturally, we can't explain to you how your particular
          telecommunications program allows you to change such settings. We
          suggest that you go through the manual that came with your
          telecommunications program to verify what the default telecommu







          nications settings are and that you check out how to change them
          in your telecommunications program if the need arises.
               We emphasize once again, transmitting data can be a breeze
          but only if all the settings match on both your Braille 'n Speak
          and the other device and if your cables are the proper cables.
          Overlooking any one of these issues can cause you needless
          frustration and confusion.  Setting it up right the first time
          will save you many headaches later.
               Next, we move on to the specifics of transmitting data
          between your Braille 'n Speak and a computer, using modem
          protocols.
               ** 4.3.6 Using Sophisticated Modem Protocols in Transmission
               Note: This feature is unique to the 640.
               So far in our discussion of transmitting data from your
          Braille 'n Speak to a computer, we've talked exclusively about
          using the t-chord command.  There is a better way to transmit
          data when you're dealing with whole files.
               A telecommunications program not only helps you to match
          telecom munications settings in the PC with those in your Braille
          'n Speak, but it also handles the way in which your file is trans
          mitted for maximum efficiency in the most error-free manner
          possible.
               Telecommunications programs range in their level of
          sophistica tion   on this point.  But even the simplest ones ask
          you whether the file you're transmitting is in ASCII.  Recall
          that the ASCII character set is made up largely of the alphabet,
          punctuation marks, numbers, and so on.  It is possible to send a
          file from one computer to another which is not comprised of these
          charac ters and most telecommunications  programs have provisions
          for such files.
               For the most part, files you transmit from your Braille 'n
          Speak to a computer are ASCII files, even if they're in Grade 2
          braille.  When your telecommunications program is ready to
          receive a file from your Braille 'n Speak and asks you whether
          you are sending it an ASCII file, you can answer, "yes" and use
          your t-chord command on the Braille 'n Speak followed  by the
          appropriate letter b - for a braille file, for example.
               However, many telecommunications packages now have more
          flexibil ity, and so does your Braille 'n Speak.  When it's ready
          to receive your file from the Braille 'n Speak, it may also ask
          you whether you want to use a "modem protocol", such as xmodem,
          ymodem, zmodem, and even kermit.  Each of these options may be
          advantageous to you over ASCII as a transmission option at times.
          (Note: The Braille 'n Speak does not support zmodem.)  Basically,
          what these options do is to take the transmission in chunks
          rather than one character at a time and to perform error-checking
          on each chunk before accepting the next chunk.
               We realize that this explanation oversimplifies why the
          various modem protocol options are useful.  But at least this
          gives you a feel for why you might want to use them.
               Let's go through a couple of examples of what it means to
          choose these modem protocols when transmitting a file between the
          Braille 'n Speak and your PC.
               Here again, we assume that all cables are connected







          properly, that you have made sure that telecommunications
          settings such as Baud rate, parity, data bits and stop bits, all
          match.  And we further assume that you are running a
          telecommunications program in your PC.
               First, let's look at a transfer going from the PC into your
          Braille 'n Speak.
               From the Files menu in the Braille 'n Speak, enter a t-chord
          (for transfer).  The Braille 'n Speak prompts, "Enter s to send
          or r to receive".  If you press an s-chord or an r-chord, you
          will hear the names of the files as they are being transmitted. 
          If you simply write an s or an r, you do not hear their names as
          they are being transmitted.  For now, let's write an r to receive
          a file.
               A note of caution: If you have a file in the Braille 'n
          Speak with the same name as the one you are receiving from your
          PC, the Braille 'n Speak asks you whether you want to delete the
          one in the Braille 'n Speak.  If you answer, "Yes", it will be
          deleted and replaced by the incoming file.  If you answer, "No",
          the transfer is aborted altogether.
               Now the Braille 'n Speak gives you some options to consider,
          "Enter x for xmodem, y for ymodem, g for ymodem g or k for
          kermit."
               (Note: ymodem g does not work with 38400 Baud for a file
          longer than one page.)
               If you write an x (for xmodem), the Braille 'n Speak asks,
          "Enter filename".  Write the filename followed by an e-chord. 
          The Braille 'n Speak confirms your choice with, "Start the
          transfer." Obviously, on the PC side of things, you must choose x
          for xmodem as well in order for the transfer to work properly.
               If you had chosen y (for ymodem), g (for ymodem g), or k
          (for kermit), the Braille 'n Speak does not prompt you for a
          filename because it gets that information as part of the transfer
          automat ically.  It creates the filename in your Braille 'n Speak
          as it receives it from the PC. 
               (Incidentally, remember the s-chord command for the disk
          drive? You can use the y option with that command as well to
          transmit files to an attached disk drive.)
               Now let's make sure you understand how to approach this
          process from the PC side.  From within your telecommunications
          program, you select the "Upload" option and when asked how you
          want to send this PC file and are offered the various choices
          discussed above, you select the one that matches what you have
          chosen on the Braille 'n Speak.  So choose x for xmodem if you
          selected that on the Braille 'n Speak.
               The telecommunications program asks you the name of the PC
          file you want to send and you type that name usually followed by
          the Enter key on your PC.
               When the Braille 'n Speak has received the file, it will let
          you know with an "Okay" prompt, followed by "Enter file command".
          Why that prompt?  Well, remember that you issued the t-chord from
          the Files menu.  You're still there.  If you want to see the
          contents of the file you just received, you simply press a dots
          4-5-6-chord to bring you to the last file in your file list and
          then press an o-chord to open it.







               Now let's say that something went wrong and the transfer was
          aborted.  In such a case, the Braille 'n Speak says, "Transfer
          canceled; enter file command."  You'll probably see some kind of
          error message on your PC as well.
               If you use the x (for xmodem) option for transmitting files,
          you can only transmit one file at a time.  However, with ymodem
          or kermit, you can receive multiple files with the wildcard
          charac ters mentioned in Section 4.2.4.1 (see Appendix A for
          details.) For example, when your telecommunications program asks
          you for the name of the file you want to send, you could type
          "*.txt" and all files that have a ."txt" extension in your
          current PC direc tory are queued up and sent to the Braille 'n
          Speak, each one getting named separately in your Braille 'n Speak
          and being added to your file list as it is received.
               Now let's look at an example where you're sending a file
          from the Braille 'n Speak to the PC using these modem protocol
          options we've been discussing.
               We'll use the file called "practice" that we created in
          Chapter 2 as our sample file to transmit to the PC.  Enter the
          Files menu and then press a t-chord. This time, respond with an s
          to the prompt, "Enter s to send or r to receive."
               Now you are prompted to, "Enter x for xmodem, 1 for xmodem
          1K,  y for ymodem, or k for kermit."  We didn't see the option "1
          for xmodem 1K" in the options for receiving files from the PC
          because the Braille 'n Speak can distinguish whether it is
          receiving a file with plain xmodem or with xmodem with 1K
          protocol.  Also, notice that you don't see the option "g for
          ymodem g" here.  If you had set your PC to receive the Braille 'n
          Speak file with ymodem g, simply choose the ymodem option on the
          Braille 'n Speak side to send the file to the PC.
               If you choose either the x or 1 options for the two xmodem
          choices available to you, you can send only one Braille 'n Speak
          file at a time to your PC.  However, if you choose either y (for
          ymodem) or k (for kermit), you can send a bunch of files from
          your Braille 'n Speak to the PC.
               When you choose the y or k options for sending files from
          the Braille 'n Speak to the PC, the Braille 'n Speak places you
          in your file list so that you can "mark" the files you want to
          send. Marking files in your file list prepares them to be sent. 
          We'll see how in a minute.  After you're done marking which files
          you want to send, press an e-chord to tell the Braille 'n Speak
          to start transmitting.
               Let's look at marking.  There are several ways to do it.
               To mark files you can move through your file list in the
          usual way with dot 1-chords to move backward and dot 4-chords to
          move forward through the list.  You can press a c-chord to hear
          the name of the file you are pointing to spoken again and you can
          use an l-chord and a dots 4-5-6-chord to move to the top and
          bottom of your file list respectively, as usual.
               When you come across a file that you do want to send to the
          PC, "mark" it by writing a y.  In other words, you're saying,
          "yes, I want to send this file".  The Braille 'n Speak responds,
          "file name is marked".  Now you can continue moving through your
          file list to choose more files to send to the PC.







               As you move through your file list in this marking process,
          the Braille 'n Speak tells you whether the file you're pointing
          to is already marked.  If a file was already marked from a
          previous transmission that you don't want to send at the present
          time, you can "unmark" it by writing an n.
               If you want to move a little faster through the process of
          marking files in your file list, press a y-chord to mark a file
          and automatically move to the next file in your file list.
               In addition, if you want to send every file in your list to
          the PC, say, for backup purposes, simply write an m.  This marks
          all files except Help and Clipboard to be sent.  Press a u to
          unmark all your files at once.
               Another way to use the marking feature is to press an
          m-chord or u-chord to mark or unmark a specific group of files
          that have similar names.  For example, let's say that you have
          several files in your Braille 'n Speak with names like,
          "address.brl" and "practice.brl".  You can press an m-chord
          followed by the charac ters "*.brl" and all files with names that
          end in ".brl" are marked for sending to your PC.  Similarly, you
          can press a u- chord followed by "*.brl" to unmark all such files
          so that they are not sent to your PC.
               By the way, pressing the spacebar toggles between marking
          and unmarking the file to which you are currently pointing also.
               Remember, throughout this whole discussion of marking files,
          we've been in the middle of the transmission process.  In other
          words, you entered your Files menu, pressed t-chord to transmit
          and an s for sending files from the Braille 'n Speak to the PC,
          and further chose either y or k for your modem protocol.  And
          finally, now you have marked the files you want to send.  To tell
          the Braille 'n Speak that you're finished marking, as we said
          earlier, you press an e-chord.  That says, "Okay, I'm done
          choosing the files I'm going to send, Braille 'n Speak.  Now go
          ahead and send them, please."
               The Braille 'n Speak says, "Start the transfer."  This means
          that it's ready to send and is waiting for a signal from your PC
          that says, "Okay, I'm ready to receive."
               So now, on the PC, select the "Download" option in your
          telecom munications program.  When prompted, choose the same
          protocol as you chose on your Braille 'n Speak, for example, y
          (for ymodem). You should hear clicking and hissing from the
          Braille 'n Speak and your disk drive spinning in your PC as files
          come into it. In fact, you'll also hear numbers coming across
          your PC screen. Don't worry, these are error checking signals
          being emitted and it indicates that all is well.
               Should things go wrong, the PC and Braille 'n Speak will
          both issue messages telling you that the transfer has been
          aborted. In the case of the Braille 'n Speak, you'll find
          yourself back in the Files menu at the prompt, "Enter file
          command".  You can either try the transfer again or check to see
          whether all your telecommuncations settings match up, whether
          there's enough room in your PC to accept files, etc.  See
          Appendix A for more help.
               4.4 THE BRAILLE 'N SPEAK AS A SPEECH SYNTHESIZER
               We've talked about transmitting data between your Braille 'n







          Speak and other devices.  Another way you can use your Braille 'n
          Speak with other computers is as a speech synthesizer.  The
          Braille 'n Speak has the capability of acting as your portable
          speech synthesizer in conjunction with a screen access program in
          your PC.   Let's see how this works.
               First, we assume that you have a screen access program in
          your PC and that you understand its use.  There are numerous such
          pro grams on the market and Blazie Engineering even has one of
          its own, called PC Master.  We won't get into the mechanics of
          how your screen access program works here.  We'll only explain
          how to turn the Braille 'n Speak into the speech synthesizer
          through which you can interact with your screen access program in
          your PC.
               To run your Braille 'n Speak as a speech synthesizer, you
          don't need to run a telecommunications program in your PC.  That
          is specific to transmitting data between your Braille 'n Speak
          and the PC.  What you do need is a screen access program that sup
          ports the Braille 'n Speak as a speech synthesizer.  Check with
          the vendor of your screen access program to see if that vendor
          supports the Braille 'n Speak as a synthesizer.
               You'll need to hook up the Braille 'n Speak to the serial
          port of your computer, as previously described, and all the
          telecommuni cations parameters we detailed earlier, Baud rate,
          handshaking, and so on, must match.  (You may need to use a
          telecommunications program to set those parameters properly on
          your PC but MS DOS has other ways to do this through its "Mode"
          command.  Check your DOS manual for a detailed explanation.)
               To use the Braille 'n Speak as a speech synthesizer, get
          into the Speech Parameters menu with the usual ar-sign-chord
          (dots 3-4-5). Write a for-sign (dots 1-2-3-4-5-6).  The Braille
          'n Speak says, "Speech box mode on."  Enter an e-chord to exit
          the Speech Parameters menu.
               You are now in a mode where the Braille 'n Speak cannot
          accept input from you into a file.  You can't check your
          calendar, perform a calculation, etc.  In effect, you've turned
          the Braille 'n Speak into a "dumb" device that can only accept
          information from your PC.  The only input your Braille 'n Speak
          accepts from you directly on the Braille 'n Speak keyboard is an
          ar-sign-chord to re-enter the Speech Parameters menu followed by
          a for-sign to turn off speech box mode.
               Let's practice this much.  Even if you don't presently have
          your Braille 'n Speak linked to another device, you can test out
          this process.  Get into the Speech Parameters menu and write a
          for- sign.  You'll hear "Speech box mode on".  Exit with an
          e-chord. Now try to write something, anything,  an o-chord or a
          c-chord. Nothing happens.  Your Braille 'n Speak is waiting for
          something from your PC.  Even if it isn't hooked up to one, it
          thinks it is and patiently waits and waits.
               Re-enter the Speech Parameters menu.   Whew!  That does work
          and you hear the usual prompt, "Enter speech parameters."  Now
          write a for-sign and you hear "Speech box mode off".  Exit the
          Speech Parameters menu with an e-chord.  You're back in business. 
          The Braille 'n Speak should now respond normally again.
               Assuming that you do have your unit hooked up to a PC and







          are running a screen access program that supports the Braille 'n
          Speak, and that you've turned the Braille 'n Speak into a speech
          synthesizer, here's what happens.  As we just said, the Braille
          'n Speak is now "dumb", patiently waiting for something from the
          PC.  It monitors your interaction with the PC.  Every time you
          type a space, the Braille 'n Speak says the word you just typed.
          If you issue a command for the screen access program from the PC
          keyboard - such as "read me the whole screen" - the Braille 'n
          Speak says the contents of your PC screen to you.
               A more sophisticated way of using the Braille 'n Speak as a
          speech synthesizer is to turn speech box mode on with a for-sign-
          chord instead of a simple for-sign.  Remember that chords include
          the spacebar on the Braille 'n Speak keyboard.
               If you enter the Speech Parameters menu and press a for-
          sign- chord, the Braille 'n Speak gives you a choice about how it
          should read from the PC.  Let's try it now.
               Again, you can test this out without having your Braille 'n
          Speak actually hooked up to a PC.
               From the Speech Parameters menu, press a for-sign-chord. 
          The Braille 'n Speak says, "Enter l for line or b for block
          handshak ing."  Now don't confuse this prompt with our earlier
          discussion of handshaking and telecommunications settings.
               After you write an l or a  b in response to the prompt, the
          Braille 'n Speak says, "speech box mode on".  Then you can exit
          the Speech Parameters menu in the usual way with an e-chord.
               The choice of Line or Block handshaking is really
          subjective. Here's what the choice means.  If you choose Line
          handshaking, the Braille 'n Speak will read you text from your PC
          a line at a time, pausing at each carriage return.  In fact, the
          computer will not send more text until the Braille 'n Speak has
          read to you the present line of text.  In many cases, you'll find
          it desirable to have the Braille 'n Speak read this way, when
          you're programming, for example, or reading through a list.
               Choosing Block handshaking means that the Braille 'n Speak
          reads you blocks of text, up to 256 characters at a time.  It
          doesn't look for carriage returns as it reads to you.  Using this
          choice creates a smoother, more natural sounding speech from the
          Braille 'n Speak, with more natural pauses and inflections,
          rather than pauses controlled by the physical ends of lines on
          the screen. You'll probably find this a more useful choice for
          reading through a document where it is not important that you
          know precisely where one line ends and the next begins.
               Another interesting feature of speech box mode is
          "indexing". This capability only works if the screen access
          program you're using supports indexing.  Indexing means that the
          Braille 'n Speak is so closely linked to the PC cursor as it's
          reading, that if you issue a "stop reading" command on your PC,
          the PC cursor and the Braille 'n Speak will both stop at the same
          place.  In other words, the last word uttered by the Braille 'n
          Speak is the same word as where your PC cursor rests.  This can
          be very handy when you're doing some editing, for example, using
          a word proces sor in your PC.
               If your screen access program supports the capability to
          change speech parameters - rate of speech, volume, and so forth -







          you can change how the Braille 'n Speak reads to you from your PC
          keyboard.  Here is a brief list of the speech parameters you
          might be able to control from your PC if your screen access
          program lets you do it:
               Volume - Control e x v, where x represents a volume from 01
          to 16, 01 being the lowest volume.
               Pitch - Control e x p, where x represents a pitch from 01 to
          63, 01 being the lowest pitch.
               Speech rate - Control e x e, where x represents a rate from
          01 to 16, 01 being the slowest speech rate.
               Frequency - Control e x t, where x represents a tone from 01
          to 25, 01 being the lowest.
               Punctuation level - Control e followed by a, m, s, or z,
          where the letters represent All, Most, Some, or No punctuation,
          respec tively.
               Index marker - Control f
               Silence command - Control x
               The Braille 'n Speak's ability to perform as a portable
          speech synthesizer can come in handy if you have to interact with
          many computers or are on the road a lot and can't take extra
          equipment with you, or you can't take a PC apart to install an
          internal speech synthesizer.
               4.5 SENDING BRAILLE 'N SPEAK OUTPUT TO YOUR COMPUTER SCREEN
               You can write in your Braille 'n Speak and have the output
          sent directly to your computer screen.  That screen may be your
          PC screen or it may be a Personal Touch or, with the 640, a Mini
          Braille.  (These are two braille display devices sold by Blazie,
          Engineering.)
               To turn your Braille 'n Speak into a remote device, all the
          usual telecommunications settings previously described must match
          up and cable requirements must be met.
               Press a 0-chord (dots 3-5-6) on the Braille 'n Speak.  It
          says, "Remote".  Write a b for linking it to the Personal Touch
          as a braille display.  With the 640, you can also write an m for
          use with the MiniBraille.  Write a dot 4 to send output directly
          to a computer screen.
               Note: In the 640 writing a dot 4 produces the prompt,
          "ASCII" while in the Classic it produces the prompt, "Invalid
          input". But dot 4 does work in both models.   
               Turn the remote mode off by turning off the Braille 'n
          Speak.
               4.6 SUMMARY
               We have covered a great deal of complicated material in this
          chapter.  We suggest that you review the steps outlined in those
          sections that meet your needs and not to dwell on those that
          don't.  Telecommunications can be wonderful but the staggering
          array of possibilities can daunt even the heartiest among us.
          Take your time learning about telecommunications and use Appendix
          A, Troubleshooting, to help you when you get confused.  Usually,
          telecommunications challenges arise from simply forgetting a step
          in the process.  Once you've mastered the process though, you'll
          definitely reap its rewards.







               Appendix A - Troubleshooting
               Appendix A - Troubleshooting
               By now you are no doubt comfortable with the general
          operations of your Braille 'n Speak.  However, what if something
          goes wrong?
               So often, manuals tell you how to do things but not how to
          fix them when something goes wrong.  What if you hit the wrong
          key during a command? What if you issue a command, then need to
          cancel it before completion?  What if, horror of horrors, your
          file disappears?  And finally, what if any of these things
          happens at three in the morning when you really can't reach for
          the phone for help?
               All these "what-if's" are possibilities whenever you have a
          computer.  It's a simple fact of life.  For most of us, though,
          reaching for the phone, even though it may mean a toll-call, is
          easier and less scary than trying to deal with the problem
          ourselves.
               Our purpose in this appendix is to show you that many
          potentially devastating problems really aren't, that you just
          might be able to solve them yourself after all, and think how
          good you'll feel for having done so.  We reached into our files
          for the most commonly asked questions of the technical support
          staff.  We list them here with possible solutions to try before
          panicking.
               Of course, we are here if you should really need us.  But
          when you call, already having tried to solve the problem
          yourself, chances are your phone bill will be smaller because we
          won't have to walk you through the basics.  We are not
          discouraging you from calling for help and, in fact, we invite
          your feedback.  But we are confident that we can serve you even
          better  if you can first troubleshoot the problem yourself.
               Incidentally, some solutions suggested below come directly
          from those of you brave enough to challenge the murky waters of
          troubleshooting.  We commend you for helping all of us.
               And now, on to the questions:
               TELECOMMUNICATIONS QUESTIONS

          1.   How do I connect my Braille 'n Speak to my (brand name)
            printer, computer, or modem?

               You must connect the right cables and match telecommuni
          cations settings between your Braille 'n Speak and the other
          device.
               We offer a wide range of cables which connect the Braille 'n
          Speak to the most commonly used computers, printers, and modems. 
          For example, there are cables for the PC/XT and PC/AT series of
          IBM as well as cables for the Apple family of computers and
          printers.  In addition, we offer the serial to parallel converter
          cable for use with parallel printers. Refer to Section 4.1.1 for
          general information about cables and to Appendix C for technical
          information about cables.
               The Braille 'n Speak is preset with the most commonly used
          telecommunications settings.  To see how they are set, check them
          out from the Status menu.  For a full discussion of these







          settings, see Section 4.1.2.  For a listing of the default
          settings, refer to Appendix B.
               2.   I connect my cable to my modem. It fits but I cannot 
          commu nicate.
               The cable may fit, but you need a null modem adapter to talk
          to the modem.
               3.   I am connected to my modem with a null modem adapter.
          When I try to communicate, I hear, "Waiting on serial  device".
               Carrier Detect must be changed.  It is low and must be made
          high. Try "at ampersand c1" from a PC, then "at ampersand w" to
          save the configuration.
               4.   My Braille 'n Speak cable fits into my PC's serial
          port, but it will not  communicate.
               If the cable that comes with your Braille 'n Speak fits into
          your port  with  no adapters, then you probably have it in the
          parallel port.  Serial ports are usually male, so you'll need a
          gender adapter.
               5.   I hear "File is full" and I'm hooked up to a computer,
          a bulletin board with my modem, or a printer.
               If you're in a mode of duplex where material is stored
          and/or echoed back from the other device, and therefore written
          to the end of your currently open file, you might run into a
          "File is full" error message.  Check the contents of the file and
          delete extraneous text if necessary.  (Re member to turn the
          serial port off in order to be able to do this.  Also, changing
          the duplex or Echo feature of the device in question may help.
               6.   My Braille 'n Speak doesn't speak the last character it
          receives from the PC or bulletin board that I am connected to
          with my modem.
               You need to set the Interactive Timeout parameter, normally
          set to 0 (or "off).  Set this parameter from the Status menu. 
          The Interactive Timeout parameter sets the length of time that
          the Braille 'n Speak waits before speaking data it has received.
               Speech devices require specific signals - for example,
          carriage returns and spaces - in order to speak data they have
          received from another device.  Occasionally, the final signal
          sent from an external device is not what the Braille 'n Speak
          needs to see.  For these cases, the Braille 'n Speak produces a
          signal of its own.  The interactive timeout parameter sets the
          amount of time that the Braille 'n Speak waits before generating
          this signal.
               Enter the Status menu with an st-sign-chord and write an x.
          You hear something like, "Interactive timeout, 0."  This means
          that the timeout feature is turned off.  You can change the
          length of time the Braille 'n Speak waits before issuing the
          signal to speak the data it has received from 1 to 255 tenths of
          a second.  So setting it to 10 means that the Braille 'n Speak
          waits one second before speaking data it has received.
               7.   When using the Braille 'n Speak as a remote device with
          the Personal Touch or the MiniBraille, how do I match up the
          telecommunications settings?
               Remember that the MiniBraille option is available only for
          the 640 model.  Its default settings are: 9600 Baud, no parity, 8
          data bits, 1 stop bit, software handshaking.







               For the Personal Touch, the default settings are: 4800 Baud,
          even parity, 7 data bits, 1 stop bit, software handshaking.
               Finally, make sure that you've activated the serial port
          before issuing the 0-chord command to turn the Braille 'n Speak
          into a remote device.
               PRINTING QUESTIONS

          1.   When I try to print, my printer won't move to the next line.

               Append linefeeds is off. If you turn this setting on, a
          linefeed character is sent to the printer with every line which 
          is printed.  See Section 4.3.3.
               2.   When I try to print, the Braille 'n Speak says,
          "Waiting on serial device".
               The printer is probably off-line. Turn the printer on-line.
          If this does not work, connect a minitester in between  the
          Braille 'n Speak and the printer.  (The minitester comes with
          Blazie's interface kit.  Call for more information.)
               3.   When I try to print, the Braille 'n Speak says, "Okay",
          but nothing happens.
               First, check whether the telecommunications settings on both
          devices match.  Check Baud rate, parity, data bits, stop bits,
          and handshaking.
               Next, try turning on  Append Linefeeds. Some printers need a
          linefeed character with every  line or they will not even print.
               Next, check the pins in the serial ports of both devices to
          see if they are bent or broken. 
               4.   When I print either to a PC or printer, I get garbage,
          mainly x's, p's and at signs.
               Most likely, Baud rates don't match.  Check the Baud rate on
          both devices.
               5.   When I print, my document is missing characters.
               This is probably a handshaking problem.  The Braille 'n
          Speak's handshaking may  be different from the printer's.
               8.   I can't send or receive files from my disk drive and I
          am properly connected to it.  If I press a t-chord, I don't hear
          the "disk drive" message before the prompt, "Enter s to send or r
          to receive" and if I press an s-chord from within my file, I
          hear, "Storage device missing".
               Check that the disk drive is turned on.  If turning it on
          does not solve the problem, then turn the Braille 'n Speak off
          and on again.
               CRASH AND RECOVERY QUESTIONS

          1.   All of my files have become gibberish, and when I go  into
            the  Files menu, the titles are incorrect.

               This rarely happens to our newer revisions, but this sounds
          like a crash.  In other words, there may be something wrong with
          your unit, but it may be fixable.  Try a "warm" reset. If that
          does not  work, you must do a "cold" reset, the i- chord.
               You do a "warm" reset to return all Braille 'n Speak set
          tings to their default values (except for the battery timer)
          without losing data.  When you press a for-sign-chord (dots







          1-2-3-4-5-6), the Braille 'n Speak says, "Warm reset, please
          verify".  When you press a second for-sign-chord, it says "Okay".
               CAUTION:  Do not use a warm reset within another command or
          while data are being transmitted.
               You can also do a warm reset when you turn on the Braille 'n
          Speak.  To issue the command, turn off the Braille 'n Speak. Then
          hold down all seven Braille 'n Speak keys as you turn on the
          power.  Once power is on, continue to hold down the keys for
          about a second.
               Use the "cold" reset procedure only as a last resort.  All
          settings are reset to their defaults and all files you may have
          created as well as their data might be lost.
               For about 2 seconds, press an i-chord as you turn on the
          power to the Braille 'n Speak.  You hear, "System initial ized;
          Braille 'n Speak ready; Help is open; delete all data in file
          areas, enter y or n?"  If you answer, "Yes", it says, "Are you
          sure?" to really force you to think.  If you still answer, "Yes",
          you hear beeps while the Braille 'n Speak "cleans up" things by
          putting x's throughout your files.  Your data is irrevocably
          lost.  This process insures that no one can recover your personal
          data - a good idea when exchanging your Braille 'n Speak for an
          upgrade or a repaired machine.
               2.   When I turn on my Braille 'n Speak, it gives the
          correct message, but  every time I press a chord or key it either
          says, "space" or "file is  write-protected".
               You may have write-protected the currently open file and
          don't remember having done so.  Get into the Files menu and press
          an i-chord to hear the status of the currently open file.  If it
          is write-protected, unprotect it with a u- chord.
               Or, you may be in One-Handed mode. Hold down dot 3 as you
          power on. If that still does  not fix it, hold down all seven
          keys at power on to perform a "warm reset".

          3.   When I hit a chord, the Braille 'n Speak resets, saying,
            "Braille 'n Speak ready".

               This rarely happens, but a warm reset usually fixes the
          problem.
               4.   My Braille 'n Speak turned on and is dead.
               A warm reset usually fixes this problem.
               5.   I have deleted a file (or portion of a file)
          accidentally; is there any way to get it back?
               This depends on whether you've done anything since your
          deletion.  If you have not created another file, or per formed
          another deletion, there is hope.  Here are a couple of scenarios:
               You've deleted text from the current cursor position to the
          end of the file.
               Recall that the Clipboard is a "trash can".  The text you
          just deleted is there, or at least the first 4,096 charac ters of
          it.  The rest of the text, if there was more than one Braille 'n
          Speak "page" worth of text, is in another place in Braille 'n
          Speak memory.  Remember our analogy to the binder.  It's as if
          the Braille 'n Speak put the first page of the text you deleted
          into the Clipboard and the rest of the pages at the back of the







          binder.
               To bring them back where they belong into your currently
          open file, first press an ing-sign-chord (dots 3-4-6) c to copy
          the contents of the Clipboard back into your currently open file,
          thus recovering the first "page" worth of text. 
               Then from the Files menu, write a for-sign (dots 1-2-3-4-5--
          6).  The Braille 'n Speak says, ""Recover file, enter y or n". 
          Entering y should recover the rest of your text into your
          currently open file.
               Go to the end of the file and check the location of the
          cursor as well as how much room there is left.  If you see
          numbers that don't make sense or unwanted text, it probably means
          that you've recovered extraneous text.  Press dot 1- chords and
          dots 2-3-chords to move backward through the file until you find
          the text that should have been the end of the file.  Delete from
          that point forward to eliminate this junk from your file.
               You've just deleted the last file in your file list.
               You can recover the file from the Files menu using a similar
          procedure to the one just described.  But you now have no file to
          fill with text.  So the first step is to create a file with the
          appropriate number of pages you threw away. (If you're not sure
          of this number, then start with a one- page file.  You may have
          to keep making the file bigger a page at a time and then
          performing the recover operation repeatedly until you have
          recovered the complete file.)
               Suppose that you have a two-page file called "junk" that you
          have just deleted by mistake.  When you read your file list from
          the Files menu with an l-chord, a q-chord, or even a v- chord,
          it's just not there.  To start the recovery process, from the
          Files menu write a c to create a new file.  Name the file
          anything you want.  (The file's name is irrelevant to the Braille
          'n Speak.  Just naming it the same name as the deleted file won't
          recover it.)
               Go ahead and answer the usual prompts for creating a new
          file.  You should now be in an empty, open file.  From the Files
          menu write a for-sign (dots 1-2-3-4-5-6).  At the prompt, write a
          y.  You should recover the file, although you may have extraneous
          text to delete at its end.
               These are tricky maneuvers, but they may save important data
          for you.  We suggest that you practice this procedure with a junk
          file before attempting it with real data.
               BRAILLE TRANSLATION QUESTIONS 
               1.   I am using the Braille 'n Speak as a speech
          synthesizer. When I hit a key on  my PC, I get the Grade 2
          equivalent, like do for d, can for c, etc.
               Speech box uses the Clipboard as a buffer.  Go into the
          Clipboard and switch off the translator.
               2.   I am trying to use the 640 calendar alert feature.  I
          pasted the date  correctly but I still don't hear the alert when
          I turn on the unit.
               If you entered the date in computer braille, the translator
          in the calendar file must be off. If you pasted the date in Grade
          1 braille, the translator must remain on in the calen dar file. 
          See whether the date is written in computer braille or Grade 1







          braille, and then make  sure the transla tor is set to match.
               Also, see whether Calendar Check is "on" from the Status
          menu.
               MISCELLANEOUS QUESTIONS

          1.   The o-chord k command gives the wrong answer.

               The calculation must be on a line by itself, with no other
          text.  You must write it in computer braille - using dropped
          numbers and correct operator symbols - as though you were in the
          calculator.  The Braille 'n Speak must  be in Line Reading mode,
          not Window or Sentence mode.
               2.   I've started to issue a command, like Insert text, or
          Find text, or a macro, but want to cancel the process.
               Abort with a z-chord.  This command aborts almost any proce
          dure.  If, for example, you issue the Insert command and change
          your mind, a z-chord prevents unintended insertion of text.  In
          addition, a z-chord aborts the transmission of data and releases
          the handshake line in the event of a "handshake hang-up".
               If you issue a z-chord from within the Help file, you leave
          Help and return to the file in which you were last working.
               3.   I don't hear anything when I press a backspace (b-
          chord).
               You might have duplex set to full or none.  Go into the
          Status menu or the Parameters menu and change it to half.
               4.   The filenames on the disk in my PC or my disk drive are
          not the same as the names of the files that I transmitted from my
          Braille 'n Speak.
               You must use MS DOS file naming conventions when naming
          Braille 'n Speak files that you plan to send to a PC or to the
          external disk drive.  Briefly, the name of a file con sists of a
          "filename" and "extension" separated by a period. The "filename"
          portion may contain up to eight characters, and the extension up
          to three characters.  You may not use spaces or wildcard
          characters (the asterisk and question mark) in a filename.  You
          do not have to use extensions but most MS DOS files have them,
          especially program files.
               Suppose that you have a file in your Braille 'n Speak called
          "phone book".  When you send it to the PC, it truncates to
          "phoneboo" because DOS sees only the first eight characters and
          eliminates the space character.  So, when you look for the file
          on the PC written as your Braille 'n Speak knows it, you won't
          find it.  It is there, but it's called "phone boo", not "phone
          book".
               5.   How and when can I use "wildcard" characters in
          filenames?
               You can use "wildcard" characters (the asterisk and the
          question mark) as part of filenames and their extensions from the
          Files menu during most commands that prompt you to "Enter
          filename" - deleting files, marking or unmarking files, getting
          file information, for example.  (The marking and unmarking
          process is available only in transmission of files with the
          ymodem or kermit modem protocols.  These transmission options are
          available for the disk drive as well as for the serial port with







          the t-chord command from the Files menu.  See Sections 4.2.4 and
          4.3.6.)
               The asterisk and question mark must be entered in computer
          braille notation: dots 1-6 for the asterisk, dots 1-4-5-6 for the
          question mark.  The asterisk replaces either the filename or the
          extension portion of the name of a file; the question mark
          replaces individual characters in either the filename or
          extension portion of the name of a file.  Also, remember that the
          period must also be in computer braille (dots 4-6).  See Appendix
          D for a complete listing of com puter braille equivalents to the
          ASCII character set.
               Here are two examples:
               Suppose that you have five files in your Braille 'n Speak
          named "notes1", "notes2", etc. and you want to work with them as
          a group.  At the "Enter filename" prompt, you may write "notes"
          followed by a question mark followed by an e- chord.  All files
          that start with the letters "notes" are affected.
               Now suppose that you have several files that all have the
          extension ".brl".  At the "Enter filename" prompt, you may write
          "*.brl" and an e-chord.  All files having the ".brl" extension
          are affected.
               Of course, you may use the question mark more than once to
          affect groups of files where only some of the characters are the
          same and still use the asterisk for the filename or extension
          portion.  For example, say that you have a bunch of files where
          the filename portions are all different but whose extensions all
          start with a b and have different ending characters.  Let's say
          that the extensions of these files represent braille files for
          different states and you're using the two-letter abbreviation for
          the states. Your files have names like, "customer.bme",
          "vendor.bny", "dealers.bfl".  You can use the wildcard name
          "*.b??" to refer to this group of files.







               Appendix B - Quick ReferenceAppendix B - Quick Reference
               INTRODUCTION
               The Braille 'n Speak Classic and Braille 'n Speak 640 are
          prod ucts of Blazie Engineering, 105 E. Jarretsville Rd., Forest
          Hill, Maryland 21050; (410) 893-9333.
               This quick reference guide is designed for both models with
          special features of the 640 highlighted by an asterisk (*).
               There is a limit of 41 files for the Classic and 77 files
          for the 640.  For both models, a Braille 'n Speak page is 4,096
          charac ters.  There are 45 free pages in the Classic and over 150
          free pages in the 640.  A single file may contain as many pages
          as desired as long as that number does not exceed the 45-page
          limit for the Classic or the 150-page limit for the 640.
               A line is defined as a block of text ending with a carriage
          return.  A paragraph is defined as a block of text ending with
          two or more carriage returns or two or more carriage return/line
          feed pairs.
               Page format commands allow you to specify physical line
          length and page length when ready to transmit text to a printer
          or braille embosser.
               In this reference guide, a "chord" refers to pressing down
          the spacebar simultaneously with a braille character.  For
          example, an e-chord means to press down the spacebar
          simultaneously with dots 1 and 5.
               The phrase "(y,n)" means that you should choose y for Yes or
          n for No.
               Unless otherwise specified, a braille number sign (dots
          3-4-5-6) is used only for clarity and the number indicated should
          be written in "dropped" or lowercase notation.  For example, if
          you see a number sign followed by the letter a, which normally
          means the number one, you should write a dropped number one (dot
          2). 
               You may ignore spaces in command sequences; they are used
          only for readability.
               SPEECH PARAMETERS MENU
               Enter Speech Parameters menu - ar-sign-chord (dots 3-4-5)
               Exit Speech Parameters menu saving current settings -
          e-chord or z-chord

          Softer volume - dot 1
          Louder volume - dot 4
          Slower speed - dot 2
          Faster speed - dot 5
          Lower pitch - dot 3
          Higher pitch - dot 6
          Lower frequency - dots 2-3
          Higher frequency - dots 5-6

               Cycle among keyboard modes (key echo, key click, silent
          keys) - spacebar
               Toggle between speaking numbers as digits and speaking
          numbers as words - n
               Do not announce any punctuation - z








          Announce some punctuation - s
          Announce most punctuation - m
          Announce total punctuation (including spaces and control charac
            ters) - t
          Toggle speech box mode on/off - for-sign (dots 1-2-3-4-5-6)

               Note: All serial input is spoken but not stored in the unit.
          Press any key from the Braille 'n Speak keyboard or press Ctrl-X
          from the computer keyboard to silence the voice.
               Toggle enhanced speech box mode on/off - for-sign-chord
          (dots 1- 2-3-4-5-6)

          block handshaking - b
          line handshaking - l

               Note: The following commands assume that speech box mode is
          on. They are used by a screen access program to alter the voice
          in the Braille 'n Speak when it is acting as a speech
          synthesizer.
               Volume - Control e x v, where x represents a volume from 01
          to 16, 01 being the lowest volume.
               Pitch - Control e x p, where x represents a pitch from 01 to
          63, 01 being the lowest pitch.
               Speech rate - Control e x e, where x represents a rate from
          01 to 16, 01 being the slowest speech rate.
               Frequency - Control e x t, where x represents a tone from 01
          to 25, 01 being the lowest.
               Punctuation level - Control e followed by a, m, s, or z,
          where the letters represent All, Most, Some, or No punctuation,
          respec tively.
               Index marker - Control f
               Silence command - Control x
               FILE COMMANDS

          Enter Help file from any other file - th-sign-chord (dots 1-4-5-
            6)

               (ressing a z-chord returns you to your previously open
          file.)
               Open a file whose number is known - o-chord ##
               (## is a 2-digit number between 00-41 for the Classic and
          00-77 for the 640.)
               Enter Files menu - o-chord f
               Exit Files menu - e-chord
               Note: The following commands all begin with o-chord f.  If
          wildcard characters are permitted, a (w) appears after the
          command:

          Exit Files menu - e or e-chord

               Open an existing file - o (filename) e-chord
               Delete a file - d (filename) e-chord (w)
               List all files, and number of free pages at end of list - l
               Quick list of files - q







               Verbose list of files - v
               Tell name of currently open file - t
               ** Tell complete information about currently open file -
          i-chord
               (includes filename, braille translator status, number of
          pages, date and time when first created, number of bytes in file,
          write-protect status)
               ** Tell creation date and time of currently open file -
          m-chord
               ** Tell byte count of currently open file - wh-sign-chord
          (dots 1-5-6)
               Write-protect currently open file - p
               Unprotect currently open file - u
               Make currently open file bigger - b
               Make currently open file smaller - s
               Rename currently open file - r
               ** Tell complete file information for specified file - i
          (file name) e-chord (w)
               (includes filename, braille translator status, number of
          pages, date and time when first created, number of bytes in file,
          write-protect status)
               ** Tell creation date and time of specified file - m
          (filename) e-chord (w)
               ** Tell byte count of specified file - wh-sign (filename)
          e-chord (dots 1-5-6) (w)
               Tell number of free pages remaining in Braille 'n Speak - f
               Recover currently open file - for-sign (dots 1-2-3-4-5-6)
               Speak name and 2-digit number of currently pointed to file -
          c- chord
               Spell name of currently pointed to file - dots 2-5-chord
               Speak name of previous file in file list - dot 1-chord
               Speak name of next file in file list - dot 4-chord
               Move to top of file list - l-chord
               Move to end of file list - Dots 4-5-6-chord
               Open currently pointed to file - o-chord
               Delete currently pointed to file - d-chord
               Make currently pointed to file bigger - b-chord
               Make currently pointed to file smaller - s-chord
               Rename currently pointed to file - r-chord
               ** Tell complete file information of currently pointed to
          file - i-chord
               (includes filename, braille translator status, number of
          pages, date and time when first created, number of bytes in file,
          write-protect status)
               ** Tell creation date and time of currently pointed to file
          - m- chord
               ** Tell byte count of currently pointed to file - wh-sign-
          chord (dots 1-5-6)
               ENTERING TEXT
               Note: Any characters you write are appended to the end of
          the file unless you are in Insert mode.
               Backspace - b-chord
               (places the cursor on the character without erasing it)
               Speak current cursor position within the file - wh-sign-







          chord (dots 1-5-6)
               (announces column position from the last carriage return and
          number of characters from the beginning of the file)
               Speak current cursor position within physical print or
          braille page and line number - sh-sign-chord (dots 1-4-6)
               Speak room left in current file - r-chord
               Uppercase only next character to be written - u-chord
               (Use dot 6 instead when braille translation is on.)
               Uppercase lock - u-chord, u-chord
               (Do not use with braille translation turned on.)
               Uppercase unlock - q-chord
               Overwrite current character - ow-sign-chord (dots 2-4-6)
               Mark beginning of block of text at current cursor position -
          m- chord
               Write a control character - x-chord followed by character
               Write an "escape" control character - x-chord followed by
          ow-sign (dots 2-4-6)
               (a left brace in computer braille)
               Write a carriage return in control character form - x-chord
          m

          Write a linefeed - x-chord j
          Write a formfeed control character - x-chord l
          Tab a specified number of columns relative to the last carriage
            return - dots 4-5-chord followed by dropped number

               (number refers to number of spaces to be counted from last
          carriage return)
               CURSOR MOVEMENT AND SPEAKING OF TEXT
               Note: When a single character is spoken, its pitch is higher
          than normal if the character is in uppercase.
               Speak current character - dots 3-6-chord
               Speak current character phonetically - dots 3-6-chord twice
               (e.g. a alpha, b bravo)
               Move to and speak previous character - dot 3-chord
               Move to and speak next character - dot 6-chord
               Speak current word - dots 2-5-chord
               Spell current word - dots 2-5-chord twice
               Move to and speak previous word - dot 2-chord
               Move to and speak next word - dot 5-chord
               Speak current line - c-chord
               Move back and speak previous line - dot 1-chord
               Move forward and speak next line - dot 4-chord
               Move back to previous paragraph - dots 2-3-chord
               Move forward to next paragraph - dots 5-6-chord
               Move to top of file - l-chord
               Move to end of file - dots 4-5-6-chord
               Speak all text from current cursor position to end of file -
          er- sign-chord (dots 1-2-4-5-6)
               Move a specified number of lines - number-sign-chord (dots
          3-4-5- 6) followed by a dropped number (moving forward) or
          followed by a minus sign (dots 3-6) and a dropped number (moving
          backward)
               Skip blank lines when moving cursor - and-sign-chord (dots







          1-2-3- 4-6) (y, n)
               Speak windows, lines or sentences - w-chord w (windows), l
          (lines), or s (sentences)
               Move to beginning of marked block of text - number-sign-
          chord (dots 3-4-5-6) m
               Switch into review mode - o-chord r
               (Used strictly for reading through file without chording;
          for example, dot 1 reads the previous line, dot 4 the next line,
          dots 1-4 the current line.  Pressing any chord returns the
          Braille  'n Speak to normal operation.)
               FINDING, DELETING AND INSERTING TEXT
               Note: The following commands all end with an e-chord but can
          be aborted by a z-chord from anywhere within the process before
          the e-chord is pressed (and for the Find command, even after the
          e- chord is pressed).
               Notes about Find mode:

          You can search for a block of text up to 63 characters in length.

               You can use backspace (b-chord) to make corrections in the
          character string as you write it.
               You can read the character string you have written so far by
          pressing a c-chord.
               Distinguish  case sensitivity  of text during a search -
          the- sign-chord (dots 2-3-4-6) (y, n)
               (Case sensitivity is normally off.)
               Find text forward from current cursor position - f-chord
          followed by text to find e-chord
               Find text backward from current cursor position - f-chord
          fol lowed by text to find th-sign-chord (dots 1-4-5-6)
               Notes about deleting text:

          Place cursor at beginning of block of text to delete.
          All delete commands begin with a d-chord.

               The letter following the d-chord indicates the block of text
          you want to delete.  To delete multiple blocks of text, follow
          the appropriate letter with a dropped number.
               Complete all delete commands with an e-chord.
               Delete current character(s) - d-chord c e-chord
               Delete current word(s) - d-chord w e-chord
               Delete current line(s) - d-chord l e-chord
               (must have Windows set to Lines)
               Delete current sentence(s) - d-chord s e-chord
               (must have Windows set to Sentences)
               Delete current paragraph(s) - d-chord p e-chord
               Delete from current  cursor position to end of file -
          d-chord z e-chord
               Delete from beginning of marked block of text to current
          cursor position - d-chord m e-chord
               Special Note: Mark beginning of block to be deleted by
          placing cursor over first character in block and pressing an
          m-chord. Then place cursor one character beyond block of text to
          be deleted before executing this command.







               Notes about Insert mode:

          You can insert a block of text up to 255 characters in length.

               You can use backspace (b-chord) to make corrections in
          character string as you write it.
               You can read the character string you have written so far by
          pressing a c-chord.
               Insert text at current cursor position - i-chord followed by
          text an e-chord
               THE CLIPBOARD
               When a block of text is deleted (up to 4,095 characters in
          length) it is placed into the clipboard.
               The contents of the clipboard is cleared when Speech box
          mode or certain disk drive commands are activated.  At such
          times, the contents of the clipboard is determined by those
          activities.
               The clipboard may be expanded as any other file through the
          Files menu with a b or b-chord to the extent of free space in the
          Braille 'n Speak.
               Insert the contents of the clipboard into the currently open
          file at the current cursor position - ing-sign-chord (dots
          3-4-6).  In the 640 only, write a c to copy the contents of the
          Clipboard. 
               (No e-chord is necessary.)
               Copy text beginning with marked position to current cursor
          posi tion - gh-sign-chord (dots 1-2-6)
               (block of text is copied into clipboard but not deleted from
          file.)
               CLOCK AND CALENDAR
               Speak current time - o-chord t
               Set time - o-chord s t

          Set announcement of time to American time - o-chord s a

               (12-hour with a.m. and p.m.)
               Set announcement of time to European time - o-chord s e
               (24-hour)
               Speak today's date - o-chord d
               Set date - o-chord s d
               (month, day, year)
               Note: The following command is unique to the Classic.
               Set day of week - o-chord s w followed by a number from 1 to
          7 (1 being Sunday)
               ** Copy current date into currently open file at current
          cursor position - ing-sign (dots 3-4-6) d
               ** Copy current time into currently open file at current
          cursor position - ing-sign (dots 3-4-6) t
               CALCULATOR
               Enter calculator mode - o-chord c
               Exit calculator mode - z-chord
               Speak current line - c-chord
               Execute calculation or speak current result - e-chord
               Set level of precision of computations to specified decimal







          place - p-chord
               (up to 12 decimal places)
               Clear calculator to 0 - dots 3-5-6-chord
               Toggle between speaking numbers as digits or as words -
          f-chord
               Operators accepted by the calculator:

          plus - dots 3-4-6
          minus - dots 3-6
          times - dots 1-6
          divided by - dots 3-4
          percent - dots 1-4-6

               square root - dots 3-4-5-chord
               Store current result in memory locations - s-chord followed
          by a letter from a through f
               Recall contents of a memory location - the letters a through
          f
               May be used as part of a calculation)
               Store result of calculation - r
               (may be used in further calculations)
               STOPWATCH/COUNT-DOWN TIMER
               Enter stopwatch or timer mode - o-chord w
               Exit stopwatch or timer mode - z-chord
               Exit timer mode with timer still running - e-chord
               Start or stop stopwatch or timer - dot 6
               Reset timer - dot 3
               Read time on timer - spacebar
               Speak last time read - c
               Start count-down timer - number-sign-chord (dots 3-4-5-6)
          fol lowed by dropped numbers for hours, minutes, and seconds,
          e-chord
               * SMART CALENDAR FUNCTIONS

          * Unique to the 640
          Get a date from the calendar - o-chord g followed by date (month,
            day, year), e-chord
          (e.g., o-chord g 04151993 e-chord yields Thursday April 15,
            1993.)
          Get date a specified number of days from today - o-chord g fol
            lowed by number, e-chord

               (A number by itself is counted forward from today and a
          number preceded by a minus (dots 3-6) counts backward from today;
          e.g., o-chord g 90 e-chord counts 90 days forward from today
          whereas o-chord g -90 e-chord counts 90 days backward from today)
               Get count of days from beginning of current year to today -
          o- chord g 0 e-chord
               (e.g., Assuming today is April 15, 1993, o-chord g 0 e-chord
          yields day number 105.)
               Insert date just spoken by smart calendar into currently
          open file - i-chord e-chord
               MACROS
               Note: A macro may be up to 63 characters in length.  Its







          name may be any braille symbol: the entire alphabet plus any
          Grade 2 braille symbol.
               Start recording a macro - n-chord
               End or stop recording a macro - n-chord
               Execute a macro - j-chord followed by specified braille
          symbol of pre-recorded macro
               (e.g., j-chord followed by a letter s executes a macro you
          had previously recorded under the name s.)
               Kill speech during execution of a macro - k-chord
               Voice speech during execution of a macro - v-chord
               Pause for user entry during a macro - dots 1-6-chord (for
          single character user entry) or dots 1-6-chord twice (for full
          line of user entry)
               (e.G., n-chord, s, f-chord, dots 1-6-chord, dots 1-6-chord,
          e-chord, e-chord, n-chord defines a macro which when execut ed
          with j-chord s prompts you to, "Enter text to find" and pauses
          for your input; after you press e-chord, it searches for the text
          you requested it to find.)
               Write-protect all macros - n-chord p-chord
               Unprotect all macros - n-chord u-chord
               DISK DRIVE FUNCTIONS
               Note:; MS DOS file naming conventions hold for this section;
          that is, a filename may contain up to eight characters and an
          exten sion up to three characters.  See your DOS user's manual
          for details.
               Load a file from the disk drive - s-chord l
               Save a file to the disk drive - s-chord s
               (regardless of page format of file)
               Transmit file with page formatting to disk drive - s-chord t
          (filename) e-chord
               Kill (delete) file on disk in drive - s-chord k (filename)
          e- chord
               Format disk in drive - s-chord f (y, n)
               Speak directory of files in drive - s-chord d
               Add volume label to disk in drive - s-chord v followed by
          label name e-chord
               Make a subdirectory on disk in drive - s-chord m followed by
          subdirectory name e-chord
               Delete a subdirectory from disk in drive - s-chord x
          followed by subdirectory name e-chord
               TRANSMITTING DATA
               Enter Transmit Parameters menu - t-chord
               Abort transmission - z-chord
               Transmit all text in currently open file - t-chord a
               (without braille translation or page format considerations)
               Transmit all text in currently open file with braille
          translation off - t-chord b
               Transmit line (block of text from current cursor position to
          next carriage return) - t-chord l
               Transmit block of text from current cursor position to mark
          - t- chord m
               Transmit paragraph (block of text from current cursor
          position to next pair of carriage returns or next pair of
          carriage return /linefeeds) - t-chord p







               Transmit entire currently open file without braille
          translation or page format parameters - t-chord s
               (used mostly for backup purposes)
               Transmit  block of text from current cursor position to end
          of currently open file - t-chord z
               Notes on Modem Protocols:
               The following commands are issued from the Files menu. Press
          o-chord f to enter it.
               If a disk drive is attached to the disk drive port, the
          following commands automatically assume that you want to transmit
          files to the disk drive; otherwise, the following commands assume
          that you want to transmit files via the serial port.
               If you do want to transmit files via the serial port, it
          must be active (see commands for Parameters Menu or Status Menu).
               For files to be sent using the ymodem protocol, mark files
          with a y or y-chord, unmark with an n or n-chord as you cycle
          through file list.
               Transmit files using modem protocols - t-chord s (send) or r
          (receive)

          xmodem - x (filename) e-chord
          ymodem or ymodem g - y (filename) e-chord

               (Special note: Wildcard characters are allowed for sending
          or receiving multiple files of similar names using MS DOS
          wildcard character conventions; e.g., "*.txt" sends all files
          with ".txt" extension.)
               kermit - k (filename) e-chord
               ** SPELLCHECK FUNCTIONS
               To use the spellchecker, load the file "spell.dic" into 640
          from the external disk drive or from a PC.
               Enter spellcheck mode - o-chord ch-sign (dots 1-6)
               Exit spellcheck mode - z-chord
               Note: The following commands are performed within spellcheck
          mode.
               Spellcheck current word - w
               Spellcheck from current cursor position to end of file - z
               If a word is not found, use the following commands:

          Add word to personal dictionary - a
          Bypass word for rest of file - b
          Read word in context - c
          Enter correct word - e
          Help - h
          Skip word - o
          Repeat incorrect word - r
          Spell incorrect word phonetically - dots 3-6-chord
          Give suggested replacement words - s

               (Use dot 1-chord, and dot 4-chord to move through suggestion
          list.  Replace incorrect word with suggested choice by pressing
          e-chord.  Exit suggestion list without choosing a replacement
          word by pressing  z-chord.)
               PARAMETERS MENU







               Note: The following commands all begin with a p-chord.  An
          e- chord is not required to complete them (with the exception of
          the "Window length" parameter).
               Append linefeeds during transmission of data - a (y, n)
               Set Baud rate - b
               Track cursor in currently open file - c (y, n)
               Set duplex - d (h,f, or n)
               Set handshaking - h (s, h, or n)
               Reject ornamentation characters - o (y, n)
               Set parity - p (n, e, or o)
               Speak software revision date - r
               Set stop bits - s (1 or 2)
               Set braille translator on/off - t (y, n)
               Speak windows, lines or sentences - w (w, l, or s)
               Activate serial port - dots 2-6 (y, n)
               Set data bits - dots 4-5-6 (7 or 8)
               STATUS MENU DEFAULT SETTINGS
               Notes:
               The following parameters are reset every time you perform a
          warm, cold or hard reset.
               Settings appear in the same order in which they appear in
          the menu as you cycle through it.
               Cycle forward through the menu with dot 4-chords, backward
          with dot 1-chords.
               Jump to the top of the menu with an l-chord, to the end of
          the menu with a dots 4-5-6-chord.
               To jump directly to a setting, see the listing in brackets
          immediately following the listing of each default setting.
               For most settings, change status on/off with Y or N.  For
          those settings requiring another response, write your choice and
          press an e-chord to save that choice.
               Enter Status menu - st-sign-chord (dots 3-4)
               Exit Status menu - e-chord
               Interactive mode - off [g]
               Serial port active - off [f]
               (must be "on" to receive data)
               Baud rate - 9600    [b]
               (Use first or first two digits of Baud rate to change set
          ting.)
               Parity - none  [p]
               (e for even, o for odd, n for none)
               Duplex - half  [d]
               (f for full, h for half, n for none)
               Data bits - 8  [dots 4-5-6]
               (7 or 8)
               Stop bits - 1  [s]
               (1 or 2)
               Handshake - software     [h]
               (s for software, h for hardware, or n for no handshaking)
               Append linefeeds when transmitting - off     [a]
               Braille translator - off [t]
               Cursor tracking - on     [c]
               Recognize escape sequences - off   [{] (brace)
               Revision date - current revision date of Braille 'n Speak







               [r]
               Speak windows, lines or sentences - lines    [v]
               (w for windows, l for lines, s for sentences)
               Reject ornamentation characters - off   [o]
               (limits repetitive punctuation  to two occurrences; rejects
          decorative control characters)
               Skip  blank lines - on   [&] (and-sign, dots 1-2-3-4-6)
               Distinguish case during find - off [the-sign] (dots 2-3-4-6)
               Battery use - number of hours, minutes since battery was
          last reset [th-sign] (dots 1-4-5-6)
               (Reset timer with dropped 0 (dots 3-5-6).)
               Beep at column - 0  [q]
               Line length - 0     [l]

          Left margin - 0
          Page length - 0
          Top margin - 0
          Window length -80   [w]

               (Voice window from 20 to 80 characters in length, no effect
          on formatting or printing of text)
               Interactive timeout - 0  [x]
               Double-space - off  [ar-sign] (dots 3-4-5)
               Voice inflection - on    [i]
               Number pages - off  [#] (number-sign, dots 3-4-5-6)
               Power reminder - on [z]
               Ham calls - off     [m]
               * Calendar check - on    [j]
               * Word exceptions check - on  [e]
               * Progress clicks - on   [dots 4-5-6]
               MISCELLANEOUS COMMANDS
               Power up Braille 'n Speak silently - Hold down spacebar as
          you turn unit on.
               Enable one-handed mode - Hold down dot 6 as you turn unit
          on.
               Disable one-handed mode and return to normal use - Hold down
          dot 3 as you turn unit on.
               Warm reset - (with unit turned on) for-sign-chord (dots
          1-2-3-4- 5-6) twice
               (Resets most parameters to default settings without loss of
          current data in files; press the second for-sign-chord to
          confirm.)
               Warm reset to attempt file recovery - (as you turn on unit)
          for- sign-chord (dots 1-2-3-4-5-6)
               (CAUTION: Use as last-resort option to attempt file recov
          ery.  Files must be recovered using the process described in
          Appendix A.)
               Cold reset - (as you turn on unit) i-chord
               (Caution: Use as last resort for a crash recovery or when
          returning unit for exchange unit; wipes out all data (see
          Appendix A.)
               Enter an "Alt" key from the Braille 'n Speak into a PC -
          dots 3- 5-chord followed by dropped number from 0 to 255, e-chord
               Calculate expression on current line - o-chord k







               Turn interactive mode on/off - g-chord
               Do not translate text in between the following two symbols -
          dot 4 followed by dash followed by block of text not to be
          translated followed by dot 4 l
               (e.G., dot 4 dash Do not translate this sentence. dot 4 l)







               Appendix C - Technical Information about Serial Ports
               Appendix C - Technical Information about Serial Ports
               The following technical information provides  special
          cabling arrangements for use between the Braille 'n Speak and
          devices for which we do not offer specific cables.
               The Braille 'n Speak is a DCE device.  You'll need a null
          modem cable to interface the Braille 'n Speak with other DCE
          devices.
               The unit has two male interface ports.  The one closer to
          you when the Braille 'n Speak is in the normal operating position
          is for the disk drive (Section 4.2), and is intended specifically
          for use with that device.
               The one closer to the AC adapter jack is an RS-232 serial
          port (Section 4.3).  Below, we list its active pin assignments
          for your convenience.  (Note that the cable we provide for use
          with this port has 9 pin locations on the end which connects to
          the port and 25 pin locations at the end that connects to an
          external device.)
               Pin 2 - Data Receive (DR)
               Data transmitted to the Braille 'n Speak
               Pin 3 - Data Send (DS)
               Data  transmitted from the Braille 'n Speak
               Pin 5 - Clear To Send (CTS)
               Note: The Braille 'n Speak sets this line high when it is
          able to accept data, indicating to the DTE that it is clear to
          send to the Braille 'n Speak.  If the Braille 'n Speak cannot
          accept data (e.g., a full file), it lowers this line, signalling
          the DTE to stop sending.
               Pin 6 - Data Set Ready (DSR)
               Note: The Braille 'n Speak outputs this line high whenever
          its power is on (even if the serial port power is not on as with
          Serial Port Inactive).
               Pin 8 - tied to pin 6
               Note: Has no function of its own.
               Pin 20 - Data Terminal Ready (DTR)
               Note: This line is an input to the Braille 'n Speak signal
          ling the unit that it can transmit to the external device. If no
          device is connected, this line is pulled high.







               Appendix D - ASCII Braille SymbolsAppendix D - ASCII Braille
          Symbols
               Note: This is the list of computer braille equivalents for
          the ASCII character set, including punctuation, numbers, etc. 
          The extended ASCII character set - Greek letters and the like -
          is omitted.
               In this listing, information is presented in this order: 
          First, character name; the names of numerals and punctuations are
          spelled out and presented in regular alphabetic sequence.  Next
          comes the decimal numeric order of the character in the ASCII
          table.  The word "dots" is followed by the Braille dot numbers
          used to produce the braille equivalent of the character.  In the
          case of control (CTRL) characters, dot patterns are omitted.
          Items are separated by semicolons.
               A, Uppercase; 65; dot 1.

          a, lowercase; 97; dot 1.
          Accent; 96; dot 4 (lowercase).
          Acknowledge; 6; CTRL-F.
          Ampersand; 38; dots 1-2-3-4-6.
          Apostrophe; 39; dot 3.
          Asterisk; 42; dots 1-6.
          At Sign; 64; dot 4 (uppercase).
          B, uppercase; 66; dots 1-2.
          b, lowercase; 98; dots 1-2.
          Backspace; 8; CTRL-H.
          Backslash, (Reverse Slant); 92; dots 1-2-5-6 (uppercase).
          Bell; 7; CTRL-G.
          C, uppercase; 67; dots 1-4.
          c, lowercase; 99; dots 1-4.
          Cancel; 24; CTRL-X.
          Caret, (Exponentiation); 94; dots 4-5 (uppercase).
          Carriage Return; 13; CTRL-M.
          Close Brace; 125; dots 1-2-4-5-6 (lowercase).
          Close Bracket; 93; dots 1-2-4-5-6 (uppercase).
          Close Parenthesis; 41; dots 2-3-4-5-6.
          Colon; 58; dots 1-5-6.

               Comma; 44; dot 6.
               D, uppercase; 68; dots 1-4-5.

          d, lowercase; 100; dots 1-4-5.
          Data Line Escape; 16; CTRL-P.
          Decimal point (period); 46; dots 4-6.
          Delete; 127; dots 4-5-6 (lowercase).
          Device Control 1; 17; CTRL-Q.
          Device Control 2; 18; CTRL-R.
          Device Control 3; 19; CTRL-S.
          Device Control 4; 20; CtrlT.
          Divided by, (Slash); 47; dots 3-4.
          Dollar Sign; 36; dots 1-2-4-6.
          E, Uppercase; 69; dots 1-5.

               e, lowercase; 101; dots 1-5.







               eight; 56; dots 2-3-6.

          End of Medium; 25; CTRL-Y.
          End of Transmission; 4; CTRL-D.
          End of Text; 3; CTRL-C.
          Enquire; 5; CTRL-E.
          Equals; 61; dots 1-2-3-4-5-6.
          Escape; 27; CTRL-Open Bracket.
          Exclamation point; 33; dots 2-3-46.

               Exponentiation, (Caret); 94; dots 4-5 (uppercase.
               F, Uppercase; 70; dots 1-2-4.

          f, lowercase; 102; dots 1-2-4.
          File Separator; 28; CTRL-Reverse Slant.
          five; 53; dots 2-6.
          Form Feed; 12; CTRL-L.

               four; 52; dots 2-5-6.
               G, Uppercase; 71; dots 1-2-4-5-.

          g, lowercase; 103; dots 1-2-4-5.
          Grave Accent, (Accent); 96; dot 4 (lowercase).
          Greater Than, (Right Angle Bracket); 62; dots 3-4-5.
          Group Separator; 29; CTRL-Close Bracket.
          H, Uppercase; 72; dots 1-2-5.
          h, lowercase; 104; dots 1-2-5.
          Horizontal Tabulation; 9; CTRL-I.
          Hyphen, (minus); 45; dots 3-6.
          I, Uppercase; 73; dots 2-4.
          i, lowercase; 105; dots 2-4.
          J, Uppercase; 74; dots 2-4-5.
          j, lowercase; 106; dots 2-4-5.
          K, Uppercase; 75; dots 1-3.
          k, lowercase; 107; dots 1-3.
          L, Uppercase; 76; dots 1-2-3.
          l, lowercase; 108; dots 1-2-3.
          Left Angle Bracket, (Less Than); 60; dots 1-2-6.
          Less Than,(Left Angle Bracket); 60; dots 1-2-6.
          Line Feed; 10; CTRL-J.
          M, Uppercase; 77; dots 1-3-4.
          m, lowercase; 109; dots 1-3-4.
          Minus, (hyphen); 45; dots 3-6.
          N, Uppercase; 78; dots 1-3-4-5.
          n, lowercase; 110; dots 1-3-4-5.
          Negative Acknowledgement; 21; CTRL-U.
          nine; 57; dots 3-5.
          Null; 0; CTRL-At Sign.

               Number Sign; 35; dots 3-4-5-6.







               O, Uppercase; 79; dots 1-3-5.

          o, lowercase; 111; dots 1-3-5.
          one 49; dot 2.
          Open Brace; 123; dots 2-4-6 (lowercase).
          Open Bracket; 91; dots 2-4-6 (uppercase).
          Open Parenthesis; 40; dots 1-2-3-5-6.
          P, Uppercase; 80; dots 1-2-3-4.
          p, lowercase; 112; dots 1-2-3-4.
          Percent Sign; 37; dots 1-4-6.
          Period, (Decimal); 46; dots 4-6.

               Plus; 43; dots 3-4-6.

          Q, Uppercase; 81; dots 1-2-3-4-5.
          q, lowercase; 113; dots 1-2-3-4-5.
          Question Mark; 63; dots 1-4-5-6.
          Quotation Mark, (Double Quote); 34; dot 5.
          R, Uppercase; 82; dots 1-2-3-5.
          r, lowercase; 114; dots 1-2-3-5.
          Record Separator; 30; CTRL-Caret.
          Reverse Slant, (backslash); 92; dots 1-2-5-6 (uppercase).
          Right Angle Bracket, (Greater Than); 62; dots 3-4-5.
          S, Uppercase; 83; dots 2-3-4.
          s, lowercase; 115; dots 2-3-4.
          Semicolon; 59; dots 5-6.
          seven; 55; dots 2-3-5-6.
          Shift In; 15; CTRL-O.
          Shift Out; 14; CTRL-N.
          six; 54; dots 2-3-5.
          Space; 32; No dots.
          Start of Heading; 1; CTRL-A.
          Start of Text; 2; CTRL-B.
          Substitute; 26; CTRL-Z.
          Synchronous Idle; 22; CTRL-V.
          T, Uppercase; 84; dots 2-3-4-5.
          t, lowercase; 116; dots 2-3-4-5.
          three; 51; dots 2-5.
          Tilde; 126; dots 4-5 (lowercase).

               two; 50; dots 2-3.

          U, Uppercase; 85; dots 1-3-6.
          u, lowercase; 117; dots 1-3-6.
          Underline; 95; dots 4-5-6(uppercase).

               Unit Separator; 31; CTRL-Underline.
               V, Uppercase; 86; Dots 1-2-3-6.

          v, lowercase; 118; dots 1-2-3-6.
          Vertical Line; 124; dots 1-2-5-6 (lowercase).
          Vertical Tabulation; 11; CTRL-K.

               W, Uppercase; 87; dots 2-4-5-6.







               w, lowercase; 119; dots 2-4-5-6.

          X, Uppercase; 88; dots 1-3-4-6.
          x, lowercase; 120; dots 1-3-4-6.
          Y, Uppercase; 89; dots 1-3-4-5-6.
          y, lowercase; 121; dots 1-3-4-5-6.
          Z, Uppercase; 90; dots 1-3-5-6.
          z, lowercase; 122; dots 1-3-5-6.
          zero; 48; dots 3-5-6.


