*** *** Introduction
We at Blazie Engineering gratefully thank Craig Werner,
Ph.D. and Robert Carter, Ph.D. for their indefatigable help
in the compilation of this guide.  Never has such assistance
and support been so warmly welcomed!

A special thanks goes to our contributing writers:
Steve Booth, Robert Carter, Judith Dixon, Joe Giovanelli,
Fred Gissoni, David Goldstein, Caryn Navy, Craig Werner, and
the National Federation of the Blind.

Valuable technical assistance from David Goldfield, also,
was since

rely appreciated.

                        Deane Blazie
                        January, 1993
*** Using The Braille 'n Speak 

Interface Kit

by 

Deane Blazie



It seems that there is nothing more mystical in the computer business than 

interfacing RS-232 devices.  Even though RS-232, the name, refers to a 

standard developed for the computer industry, it still leaves us with a 

difficult task which has become an art rather than a science.  Part of the 

problem is that the RS-232 standard only partially defines the vast amount 

of information needed to connect two serial devices.  Not only do the 

connectors have to match, so that they plug into each other, but the signals 

on the 25 lines (only a few are ever needed) must also match.  Even if all of 

this gets worked out, then we have to deal with the data formats which of 

course must also match each other.  At the very least, it is difficult and tries 

your patience.  I have been interfacing computers for about 20 years, and 

while I have a systematic procedure to get them to talk to each other, it is 

still often frustrating and time comsuming.  My procedure for getting 

another serial device to talk to Braille 'n Speak involves the following steps:



        1.  Determine if the device is a DTE or DCE (I'll explain later).

        2.  Get the proper adapters to make the connectors mate.

        3.  Find out how the other device handshakes.

        4.  Set the serial data parameters.

        5.  Run a simple test with the mini-tester.



I hope that the Braille 'n Speak Interface kit, and this guide will help to 

make the task a little more successful and a little less trying.  The kit 

consists of this guide and 6 adapters.  The adapters are:



        Male to Male adapter

        Female to Female adapter

        Null Modem

        Mini-Tester

        Tweedle Dump

        9 to 25 pin adapter



The RS-232 Standard specifies a 25 pin connector referred to as a DB-25p 

and DB-25s.  The DB-25p is the 25 pin plug or Male connector.  The DB-25s is 

the Socket or Female connector.  I don't know who started calling them Male 

and Female connectors, but the term is universally used and descriptive.  A 

particular serial device,  should have either a male or female DB-25 

connector.  Some of the newer devices, however, are now using a DB-9 

connector, similar to the DB-25 except only 9 pins.  If you have one of these, 

you will need to get a 9 pin to 25 pin adapter from your local computer 

dealer or Blazie Engineering.  The interface kit assumes that you have a 25 

pin connector.  



Exchanging data over a serial connection is a lot like talking over the 

telephone.  You talk into the mouth piece and you listen in the earpiece.  If 

you have ever picked up the phone the wrong way and tried to talk into the 

earpiece and listen with the mouth piece, you know that it won't work that 

way.  The same is true of the RS-232 connection.  Braille 'n Speak sends data 

out on one of the wires and it listens to (receives data) on another of the 

wires.  So Braille 'n Speaks talk line must be connected to the other devices 

listen line in order for Braille 'n Speak to send data to the other device.  RS-

232 uses pins 2 and 3 for the talking and listening.  Pin 2 is called 

Transmitted data and pin 3 is called Received data.  This is true for all RS-

232 devices and herein lies a problem.  You might expect that when you 

hook Braille 'n Speak up to a printer that both devices transmit data on pin 2 

and both receive data on pin 3.  But this would not work because Braille 'n 

Speaks transmit line must be connected to the printers receive line in order 

for the printer to receive the data and print it.  And, in fact, Braille 'n Speak 

really does transmit data on Pin 3 and receives data on Pin 2.  So is this 

contrary to the standard which calls pin 2 Transmitted Data and Pin 3 

Received data.  NO, but it isn't obvious.  You can see from this problem, that 

not all RS-232 devices are wired the same, and they can't be, in order for the 

two to communicate.  One must be wired the opposite of the other in order 

for the talk and listen lines (transmit and receive lines) to match.  



Now, wouldn't it be nice if every time you found a Male RS-232 connector 

you would know that it transmits on pin 2 and receives on pin 3 and every 

time you found a Female RS-232 connector, you would know that it receives 

data on pin 2 and transmits on pin 3.  Yes it would, but NO, NO, NO!  It 

doesn't work that way.  There is no hard and fast rule for determining what 

pins a device transmits and receives on, based on the connector.  There is 

however some terminology which refers to the two different ways the 

devices are wired.  One device is the Data Communications Equipment DCE, 

and the other is the Data Terminal Equipment DTE.  You can directly connect 

a DCE to a DTE and (assuming the connectors mate) they devices will be 

properly wired.  This means that every serial device or port on a device is 

either a DTE or a DCE.  It helps to know which you are dealing with so that 

you can determine if the two are wired correctly or not.  You can't directly 

connect one DTE to another DTE, and you can't directly connect a DCE to 

another DCE because they are not wired to send and receive on the proper 

pins.  



Braille 'n Speak comes with a cable which converts the strange 8 pin 

connector on the left side to a standard 25 pin Male connector.  This 25 pin 

connector is a DCE, that means that you can directly connect it to a DTE 

(assuming the connectors match). Braille 'n Speaks transmits its data on pin 

3 and receives its data on pin 2.   Most printers are DTE's and it is also semi-

standard for most printers to have Female connectors on them so that Braille 

'n Speak will plug directly into them.  If you come across a printer that has a 

cable coming out of it with a Male connector on it, it is probably still wired as 

a DTE but the connectors will not mate.  All you have to do is insert a Female 

to Female adapter between the Braille 'n Speak and the Printer and the two 

should work fine.  



Modems are wired as DCE devices and usually have female connectors on 

them.  Most computer terminals are wired as DTE devices and they generally 

have Male connectors on them.  What about the IBM PC and the Apple II 

computers?  Most PC's have male connectors on the back and they are 

usually wired as DTE's.  The Apple Super Serial Card is capable of being 

either a DTE (terminal) or a DCE (modem) depending on the jumper block on 

the super serial card.  



If you want to hook a DCE to a DCE or a DTE to a DTE, you must have a null 

modem in between the two.  All a null modem does is to switch a DTE to a 

DCE or from a DCE to a DTE.  It reverses the transmit and receive pins (2 & 3) 

and in addition switches a few others which we'll talk about a little later in 

this guide.  So, if you want to hook Braille 'n Speak to a DCE, like a modem, 

you must insert the null modem adapter (included in the interface kit) in 

between Braille 'n Speak and the modem.   



How do you know if the device you want to hook to is a DCE or a 

DTE?  That's where the mini-tester comes in.  The mini-tester is the little 

adapter with the 7 lights (LED's) on the surface.  When you connect this 

mini-tester to an RS-232 device, the lights will show you which pins are high 

and which are low, and also which are not connected at all.  You may have to 

get a sighted friend to read the lights.  Each light is either red, green or not 

lit at all.  If the light is green, this indicates a negative voltage on that pin.  If 

the light is Red, this indicates a high voltage on that pin.  If the light is 

neither, then that pin is either not connected or is an input pin only 

connected on one end.  If you hold the mini-tester such that the lights are 

facing up, and with the male connector to your left, you will feel four bumps 

(lights) on the left and three lights on the right.  These lights represent the 

RS-232 pins 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 20 and 8, from top to bottom.  They are labeled on 

the face of the mini-tester as follows:



        TD     Transmitted Data        Pin 2

        RD     Received Data           Pin 3

        RTS    Request to Send         Pin 4

        CTS    Clear to Send           Pin 5

        DSR    Data Set Ready          Pin 6

        DTR    Data Terminal Ready     Pin 20

        CD     Data Carrier Detect     Pin 8



When you connect the mini-tester to the Braille 'n Speak, with the other end

of the mini-tester not connected, and then you activate the serial port, you 

will see that the RD light (this is pin 3) is green.  From that piece of 

information alone, you can tell that Braille 'n Speak is a DCE.  If it were a DTE, 

like a printer, you would see the TD light (pin 2) would be green, and you 

could assume that it is a DTE.  This is a little known fact and it can be 

immensely helpful when you are connecting two devices together.  This is 

the first thing you must know when hooking Braille 'n Speak up to another 

device.  You can't hook Braille 'n Speak up directly to another DCE, so if you 

check your device and find that it is a DCE (green light on pin 3), you know 

that you must use a null modem between Braille 'n Speak and your device.  

When checking a device with the mini-tester to see if it is a DCE or a DTE, 

you should have the mini-tester hooked up to only the device you are 

testing, not the device and the Braille 'n Speak at the same time.  Later you 

may want to hook them both up, but first find out what you are dealing 

with, a DTE or a DCE.  



If you plug the mini-tester into the back of your PC on the serial port, you 

will find that the TD light is green, the RD light is not lit, and the RTS and DTR 

lights are lit red.  If this is the case, then you definitely have a DTE device.  

All IBM compatible PC's that I have seen are DTE's.  Another tell-tale sign of 

a DTE is the red light on DTR (data terminal ready).  This is a signal that tells 

the other devices hooked to this port that the terminal device is alive.  



Once you decide whether you need the null modem, then you must decide if 

you need a Female to Female adapter in between, to make the connectors 

mate.  You can't go wrong here, because it will only work one way.  If both 

the Braille 'n Speak and the device you are hooking up to have male 

connectors, then you will need the Female to Female adapter to make them 

mate up.  



We have now done steps 1 and 2 of the recommended procedure.



HANDSHAKING



This can be very easy or very difficult.  It seems that over the years, every 

manufacturer has picked a different way to handshake.  Lately, there has 

been some standardization and things are getting easier.  First of all, what is 

handshaking?  When you send data to a printer, the computer is usually 

capable of sending the data much faster than the printer can print it.  Some 

printers have buffers (memory) to store a lot of data until the printer gets 

around to printing it.  But, even the largest buffers fill up and the printer 

must tell the computer to stop sending until it has room for more data.  Then 

the printer will say "ok, I can accept more data now".  This back and forth 

talking about accepting data is called handshaking.  It is a cooperation 

between the two serial devices in exchanging data.  



When Braille 'n Speak is accepting data, it can very quickly get each 

character sent to it and put it into memory.  It doesn't need to handshake 

because it can put data into memory at the fastest speed you can send to it.  

But, what happens when the file becomes full.  Braille 'n Speak tells the 

sending device to stop transmitting in one of a number of ways.  By using 

the command P-chord H you can select either Hardware handshaking, 

Software handshaking, or no handshaking.  If you select no handshaking, 

Braille 'n Speak will not try to stop a transmission.  When a file becomes full 

and it gets more data from the serial device, it will throw it away and say 

FILE IS FULL.  With software handshaking selected, Braille 'n Speak will send 

a special ASCII character called X-OFF out the serial port.  This is supposed to 

tell the attached device to stop sending, and if the device supports software 

handshaking, it will stop and wait for an X-ON character to be send to it.  

Braille 'n Speak will send the X-ON character when it has room to put the 

new data.  This is the easiest type of handshaking to implement if both 

devices support it.  It does not depend on a specially wired cable or adapter.  

And, it works in both directions.  If you hook Braille 'n Speak up to a printer 

and select software handshake, the printer will tell Braille 'n Speak to stop 

sending when the printer buffer is full and it will tell Braille 'n Speak to 

resume sending when it has emptied the printer buffer and is ready for 

more data.  You don't need special connectors or adapters to make this type 

of handshaking work.  



Hardware handshaking can be a little more (or a lot more) difficult.  Use it 

only if software handshaking is not supported.  While the world has 

somewhat standardized on software handshaking, hardware handshaking is 

done in a number of ways and always relies on some of the other pins in the 

RS-232 connector.  Braille 'n Speak uses two pins to implement hardware 

handshaking, one for data coming in and one for data going out.  When 

Braille 'n Speak is sending data out the serial port, it always looks at the 

voltage on pin 20 or its RS-232 connector to see if it can send the data.  If 

pin 20 is high (red light lit on DTR of the mini-tester), then it will send the 

character out.  If pin 20 is low (green light on DTR) then it will not send the 

data.  It will wait until pin 20 becomes high and if this doesn't happen 

within about 15 seconds, it will speak "WAITING ON SERIAL DEVICE".  Note 

that Braille 'n Speak monitors pin 20 no matter what type of handshaking 

you have selected.  This is unfortunately the nature of the microprocessor 

used in the Braille 'n Speak and not by choice.  However, it is not often a 

problem but it is something to watch out for.  If you get the waiting on serial 

device message, take a look at pin 20 on the Braille 'n Speak connector and 

see if it is high or low.  If it is low, then any number of things could be 

wrong.  The device it is connected to could be off line or out of paper.  Or, it 

the other device may handshake on another pin.  If this is the case, you may 

have to re-wire the devices cable or make an adapter to put in-between.  If 

you are not handy with a soldering iron, this can be a problem.  Give us a call 

and maybe we can make one for you.  I have seen devices handshake on 

pins 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 12 and 20.  Almost all DTE devices handshake on pin 20 

and that's why they work with Braille 'n Speak.  If you have a DCE (usually 

handshake on pin 5, 6, or 8)  you are hooking up to Braille 'n Speak, the null 

modem will transform it into a DTE and the handshaking may or may not be 

transformed to pin 20 for the Braille 'n Speak.  However, many problems and 

variations within null modems can create problems for the handshaking on 

pin 20.  Use the mini-tester connected directly on the Braille 'n Speak cable, 

see if pin 20 is high and see if it goes low when the other devices tries to 

handshake.  You may see another line go low and this tells you that you may 

need to re-wire the connection or tell the other device to handshake on 

another pin (some are configurable).  



If you want to hook Braille 'n Speak up to a modem, you will need the null 

modem in between the modem and Braille 'n Speak.  Now, this may present 

a problem.  The null modem connects the modems pins 5 and 6 (CTS and 

DSR) to bin 20 (DTR) on Braille 'n Speak.  DSR on the modem is data set ready 

and this pin is usually low until the modem has established a connection and 

so you can't send data to the modem from Braille 'n Speak until you have 

established a connection because pin 20 will be low.  That means that you 

can't tell the modem to dial with the AT series of commands present in most 

of todays smart modems.  What to do?  There are a couple of things you can 

do to remedy this problem.  The best way is to tell your modem to keep DSR 

high all the time.  You can usually do this with a dip switch on the modem if 

your modem supports this feature.  If it doesn't, you can open the null 

modem case and remove the wire connecting pin 20 on the Female connector 

to pins 5 and 6 on the Male connector.  This is not as easy but it is the only 

way short of making another adapter.  If you feel that you can't do this 

yourself, you can return the null modem adapter to us with a note about the 

problem and we will do it for you at no cost.  If you know in advance that 

you will be hooking up to a modem, let us know and we will remove the 

wire for you or you can buy two null modems, one with and one without 

hardware handshaking.  By removing the wire to pin 20, you have disabled 

hardware handshaking whenever you use the null modem.  



All of this discussion on hardware handshaking and the Braille 'n Speak has 

been concerned with data going from Braille 'n Speak to the external device.  

What about data coming into Braille 'n Speak from the external device.  In 

this case, Braille 'n Speak uses pin 5 one its RS-232 connector to tell the 

external device to stop sending.  The only place I can see that you would use 

this is to stop the external device from sending when the file becomes full, or 

in SPEECH BOX MODE.  Again, use software handshaking if you can, it is a lot 

easier.  But if you cant, then pin 5 is the pin that will go low when Braille 'n 

Speak cannot accept more data.  This pin must be connected to the devices 

handshake line for it to work.  A lot of devices use this line to handshake 

and in most cases it should be wired correctly.  If it isn't, you may need to 

get a special adapter.  



DON'T LOOSE FAITH



This is a difficult part of computer use.  If you don't understand some or 

most of this guide, don't loose faith.  You don't need to understand most of it 

and you will find as you get more into interfacing computers things will 

become more clear and the above will begin to make more sense.  

Fortunately interfacing Braille 'n Speak to most devices is as simple as 

plugging in the cable.  This holds true for most printers (ink and braille) and 

most PC's.  This interface kit will make it simple in most cases.  In those 

cases where you have a problem, give us a call and maybe we can help.





*** BRAILLE 'N SPEAK 

GUIDELINES FOR THE INPUT OF GRADE 2 BRAILLE

BY JUDITH DIXON



Each time you create a new Braille 'n Speak file, you will be asked "Use 

grade 2  translator?  Enter y or n."  Answering "y" will turn on Braille 'n 

Speak's powerful translator capable of converting grade 2 braille into fully 

spelled-out text. 



As you enter Grade 2 braille words in this mode, Braille 'n Speak will, in 

almost  all cases, speak the words correctly and translate them accurately 

as they are sent to  an ink prin



ter.  However, reverse braille translators, by 

their very nature, cannot make  all the necessary decisions.  To some degree, 

exception words can be added to the  braille translation tables but there 

will always be character strings which will have to be entered in computer 

braille to be spoken or printed properly. 



Within Braille 'n Speak's reverse translator, there are two ways to tell it 

that  you do not want it to translate what you have entered.  The first is a 

"do not translate" symbol for singl



e characters.  This symbol is dot 4.  If you 

enter a dot 4 before a character that you do not want translated then the 

reverse translator knows to ignore that next character. 



The most common use for the single-character "do not translate" symbol is 

for a slash in the middle of a word.  It is not possible for the reverse 

translator to know whether you want a slash or an st-sign.  For example, 

how would it know the difference between and/or and sandstorm.  The same 

string of characters is present in both words.



So, to type and/or, you would type the and-sign, dot 4, dots 3-4, and or.  If 

you need to put a dot 4 in your text, then simply enter two dot 4's in a row 

and the second one will remain as an untranslated character. 



Another use of the single-character "do not translate" symbol is for (s) at 

the end of a word.  If the letter s in parentheses is desired at the end of a 

word, the characters should be entered as follows: dot 4, computer braille 

left parenthesis (dots 2-3-4-5-6), s, and a regular braille parenthesis to

close (dots 2-3-5-6).  Otherwise,  the first braille parenthesis would have 

been translated as gg. 



There will also be occasions when you will need multiple-character "do not 

translate" symbols.  The "do not translate" symbols to surround a string of 

two or more characters are two-cell symbols.  The beginning symbol is dot 

4, hyphen (entering computer braille) and the closing symbol is dot 4, l 

(entering literary braille).  These symbols must surround the character 

string that is not to be translated.  The opening symbol must be preceded by

a space and the closing symbol must be followed by a space. 



These will be used when entering letter-number combinations such as RS-

232 or  H.R.3635 and number-letter combinations such as 21-day or 55'000-

word. 



Reverse translators will also become rather confused by a capital n or a 

capital y  in the middle of a word such as in the proper name McNevin or the 

word VersaNews.  If  these words are not placed within "do not translate"

symbols, the capital n will be translated as the letters ation.  Remember, 

when typing characters that you do not want translated, you must enter each 

character as you want it printed, including shifting the Braille 'n Speak into 

uppercase when necessary. 



Sometimes, it is necessary to prevent a string of characters from being 

treated like a contraction such as in proper names or abbreviations which 

include strings of characters that are similar to the short-form words in 

Grade 2 braille.  For example, the two-letter state abbreviations for the

states of Alabama and Tennessee would be uncontracted as the words "also" 

and "tonight" and the abbreviation for boulevard, Blvd., would be 

uncontracted as Blindvd.  In these examples, simply placing a letter-sign 

(dots 5-6) before the capital sign will take care of the situation. 



You may occasionally encounter a short-form word, particularly one that is 

surrounded by other characters, such as "unfriendly" that will not reverse 

translate properly.  In this case, "do not translate" symbols will usually not

be necessary.  Simply writing the word in grade 1 braille will produce 

accurate text. 



Another situation arising from the use of a reverse translator is the 

handling of the braille italics.  In braille, the italics sign (dots 4-6) is used 

to indicate underlined, italicized, or emphasized text.  The reverse 

translator will simply drop any and all of these signs from the beginning of 

a word.  If underlining or some other print style is desired, the appropriate

escape code should be sent to the printer. 



These modifications to your grade 2 braille file need only be made when the 

text is to be printed by an ink printer or uploaded to a computer where it 

will be read in print.  When transmitting text to an ink printer, leave the 

grade 2 translator turned on.  If the text is to be sent to a braille printer or 

to another device capable of handling grade 2 braille, "do not translate" 

symbols should not be used and the text should be transmitted with the

translator turned off so the braille will not be uncontracted as it is sent out 

the serial port. 



If, while using Braille 'n Speak, you discover any errors in the reverse 

translation of braille, please let Blazie Engineering know immediately.  The 

translation portion of the software will be updated as needed and your 

feedback is essential to making this translator as perfect as it can be.   









*** TRANSFERRING MATERIAL FROM BRAILLE 'n SPEAK 

TO VERSABRAILLE P2 SERIES 

BY JUDITH DIXON





1.  Load the terminal overlay from the master overlay tape.



2.  Issue an r-chord e and modify the parameters of the overlay as follows:

	b 9600

	d 8

	p n

	hs dtr



3.  issue an r-chord s to store the modified overlay.



4.  save the modified overlay on a working tape.



5.  To connect the Braille 'n Speak to the VersaBraille P2C and P2D you will 

need a female to female gender mender (included in the Braille 'n Speak

Interface Kit if you purchased one).  P2B users will not need the gender 

mender.



6.  You should turn the Braille 'n Speak on and set its serial port to active 

before connecting the two devices.



7.  To transfer material, load the modified overlay and open a new 

VersaBraille chapter.  It must be a new chapter.  Issue an r-chord r.  If you 

know that the material to be sent is longer than one VersaBraille page, issue

an r-chord t and the VersaBraille will change pages automatically.



8.  Be sure you are at the beginning of the material you wish to send from 

the Braille 'n Speak and issue a t-chord from the Braille 'n Speak's keyboard 

followed by the appropriate parameter, usually z to send everything to the 

end of the file.





 *** TRANSFERRING MATERIAL FROM BRAILLE 'n SPEAK

TO VERSABRAILLE II and II PLUS  

BY JUDITH DIXON





1.  From default settings, change the VersaBraille's CCP in the serial

parameters as follows:  Set dtr to hs.



2.  This setting can be saved to disk for later use with the SLCCP program.



3.  Connect the VersaBraille's serial cable to the DTE connector.  For the 

VersaBraille II, this is the one nearest the disk drive port and for the II 

Plus, it is the one nearest the AC power connector.  Connect the Braille 'n 

Speaks cable to the end of the VersaBraille cable.  For VersaBraille II Plus, a 

female-to-female gender changer will be required (in included in the Braille

'n Speak Interface kit available from Blazie Engineering).  For the 

VersaBraille II, no adapter is needed.



4.  To transfer material, select f for files; p for print; then i for serial in.   

The VersaBraille will ask for a filename and file destination.  At the "send 

command?" prompt, press any braille key except execute to answer "no".  the 

display will be blank.



5.  Turn on the Braille 'n Speak's serial port.  Be sure you are at the beginning 

of the material you wish to send and issue a t-chord followed by the

appropriate parameter (usually z to send all to the end of the file).



6.  The VersaBraille will beep every 500 characters while the transfer is in 

progress and the Braille 'n Speak will say "OKAY" when the transfer has been 

completed.  At this point, issue a z-chord on the VersaBraille to save the 

transferred data to the file.







*** Braille 'n Speak BEX and the Apple 2 

By Robert Carter





The Braille 'n Speak has an RS232 serial port which enables it to send data

to and receive data from other devices that are capable of serial 

communication.

For two serial devices to communicate, the communications parameters 

must be

matched and the proper cabling configuration must be established. This 

article

describes in some detail how to connect the Braille 'n Speak to both the 

Apple

2e and Apple 2c computers.



When a Braille 'n Speak file is sent to a computer, the file is said to

have been "uploaded." When files are sent from a computer to the Braille 'n

Speak, the term "downloaded" is commonly used. The ability to upload and

download files makes the Braille 'n Speak a very powerful tool indeed. To 

take advantage of this power, one must connect the two devices using the Braille

'n Speak's interface cable.



The Apple 2e does not have a serial port built-in. One must install a

serial interface card in one of the seven expansion slots inside the 

computer.

The most widely used of these interface cards is the Apple Super Serial Card

(SSC). This article will de



al exclusively with the SSC. Complete instructions 

on

installing the SSC are available in the SSC user's manual.



In addition to needing a serial port, the Apple must be running software

that can import and export data through this serial port. Many of the popular

software packages written for blind users have this capability. This article

explains how to set up the interface between the Braille 'n Speak, the Apple 

2e,

and the Apple 2c running the BEX word processing software from Raised Dot

Computing of 



Madison, Wisconsin. Raised Dot Computing has developed a set 

of

standard switch settings for the SSC that enables BEX to work with many 

devices

including the Braille 'n Speak.





Preparing the Super Serial Card



1. Make certain that the SSC jumper block, the one with a white triangle on 

it,

points to the word "terminal" and not to the word "modem". If the triangle

points toward "modem" remove the jumper block and turn it around.

2. There are two banks of DIP switches on the SSC. Set them as follows.

Bank 



one: OFF OFF OFF ON OFF ON OFF.

Bank two: OFF OFF ON ON ON OFF OFF.



The SSC is now set for 9600 baud, 8 data bits, 2 stop bits, and no parity.

Even if these technical terms mean nothing to you, it is essential that the

communications parameters on the Braille 'n Speak have these same values. 

In its

default state, the Braille 'n Speak is set at 9600 baud, 8 data bits, 1 stop

bit, and no parity. There is therefore only one Braille 'n Speak parameter that

does not match these SSC settings. The Braille 'n Spe



ak default is 1 stop bit,

and the SSC is set for 2 stop bits. If the number of stop bits is not the same

for both the Braille 'n Speak and the SSC, you will get garbage instead of 

data.

Change the number of stop bits to two on the Braille 'n Speak. This is done 

with

a chord p followed by an s followed by a 2. Remember that the Braille 'n 

Speak

will keep this new setting until you change it again.



Cabling



Now that the communications parameters on the SSC and the Braille 'n Speak

are set, it is necessary



 to cable the two systems together. Plug the small 

end

of the Braille 'n Speak's interface cable into the serial port on the Braille 'n

Speak; closest to the battery charger jack. Although you can physically plug 

the

other end of the cable into the SSC connector, do not do it. It is necessary to

use a universal null modem adapter between your Braille 'n Speak cable and 

the

SSC connector. This universal null modem adapter is available from Radio 

Shack.

Plug the female side of the adapter into the Braille



 'n Speak's interface 

cable,

and plug the male side of the adapter into the SSC connector. Without this

adapter, both the Braille 'n Speak and the Apple try to send and receive data 

on

the same data lines. This prevents any communication from taking place. If 

the

Braille 'n Speak's interface cable is too short to conveniently be plugged into

the SSC connector, it is possible to use a straight through 25 pin serial 

cable

as an extension. You will still need to use the universal null modem adapter. 

If

th



e extension cable has male connectors on both ends, as many printer 

cables do,

you will need an RS232 sex change adapter from Radio Shack. Use both the

universal null modem and sex change adapters.



Braille 'n Speak and BEX



Now that the communications parameters have been matched and the cabling

has been worked out, it is possible to both upload Braille 'n Speak files into

BEX chapters and to download BEX chapters to the Braille 'n Speak. To send

Braille 'n Speak files to BEX, use the input through slot p



rogram on BEX's

second menu. To send BEX chapters to the Braille 'n Speak, use BEX's print

option from the main menu. The BEX documentation gives complete details on 

how

to use these features. Remember to turn the Braille 'n Speak's serial port on

before attempting to communicate with the Apple.



Once the interface is working properly, it is a simple matter to send data

back and forth between the Braille 'n Speak and BEX. If you have problems,

review section six of the Raised Dot Computing BEX Interface Gu



ide. 

Although it

does not discuss the Braille 'n Speak specifically, it contains some general

information on setting up a new serial interface.



*** Braille 'n Speak BEX and the Apple 2c



Although the Apple 2c does not have expansion slots to plug a Super Serial

Card into, BEX sets the two built-in serial ports to the Raised Dot Computing

standard settings of 9600 baud, 8 data bits, 2 stop bits, and no parity. These

settings are identical to the Braille 'n Speak's default parameters with the

exception of the n



umber of stop bits. Change the Braille 'n Speak to 2 stop

bits. This is done from the Braille 'n Speak's keyboard. Enter a chord p

followed by an s followed by a 2. When BEX is running on the Apple 2c, 

setting

up the interface between the Braille 'n Speak and the Apple 2c is identical to

setting up the interface between the Apple 2e and the Braille 'n Speak with 

one

exception. The Apple 2c serial ports require a round nine pin din connector.

This means that the Braille 'n Speak's interface cable cannot be



 plugged into

the serial port. An Apple 2c printer cable must be used. One end of this cable

has the necessary 9 pin connector which plugs into the serial port on the 

Apple

2c. The other end has the standard 25 pin male RS232 connector. This 

connector

should be plugged into an RS232 sex change adapter. The other side of the 

sex

change adapter is plugged into the universal null modem adapter. The female 

side

of the null modem adapter is plugged into the Braille 'n Speak's interface

cable. Make sure that 



the Braille 'n Speak is set for 9600 baud, 8 data bits, 2

stop bits, and no parity. Further, remember to turn on the Braille 'n Speak's

serial port before attempting to communicate with the Apple.





*** Braille 'n Speak ProTERM and the Apple 2

by Robert Carter





The Braille 'n Speak has an RS232 serial port which enables it to send data

to and receive data from other devices that are capable of serial 

communication.

For two serial devices to communicate, the communications parameters 

must be

matched and the p



roper cabling configuration must be established. This 

article

describes in some detail how to connect the Braille 'n Speak to both the 

Apple

2e and Apple 2c computers.



When a Braille 'n Speak file is sent to a computer, this is typically

called "uploading" the file. When files are sent from a computer to the 

Braille

'n Speak files are said to be "downloaded." The ability to upload and download

files makes the Braille 'n Speak a very powerful tool indeed. To take 

advantage

of this power, one must connec



t the two devices using the Braille 'n Speak's

interface cable.



The Apple 2e does not have a serial port built-in. One must install a

serial interface card in one of the seven expansion slots inside the 

computer.

The most widely used of these interface cards is the Apple Super Serial Card

(SSC). This article will deal exclusively with the SSC. Complete instructions 

on

installing the SSC are available in the SSC user's manual.

In addition to needing a serial port, the Apple must be running software

that c



an import and export data through this serial port. Many of the popular

software packages written for blind users have this capability. This article

explains how to set up the interface between the Braille 'n Speak, the Apple 

2e,

and the Apple 2c running the ProTERM telecommunications and smart 

terminal

software from Microtalk of Louisville, Kentucky.



Preparing the Super Serial Card



1. Make certain that the SSC jumper block, the one with a white triangle on 

it,

points to the word "modem" and not to the



 word "terminal." If the triangle

points toward "terminal" remove the jumper block and turn it around.

2. There are two banks of DIP switches on the SSC. Set them as follows.

Bank one: ON OFF OFF ON ON ON ON.

Bank two: OFF OFF OFF ON OFF ON OFF.



The SSC is now set up to operate properly with ProTERM. Actually, this is

the set up that Microtalk recommends when ProTERM is to be used with a 

telephone

modem. It so happens that this set up works fine with the Braille 'n Speak as

well.



ProTERM allows one to ea



sily change the communications parameters from 

the

keyboard of the Apple. See the ProTERM documentation for instructions on 

how to

set the values for baud rate, data bits, stop bits, and parity. In its default

state, the Braille 'n Speak is set at 9600 baud, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit, and no

parity. ProTERM expects software handshaking which is the Braille 'n Speak's

default setting as well. It is easy to match these parameters in ProTERM 

from

the Apple's keyboard. Make certain that the parameters match ex



actly.



Cabling



Now that the communications parameters on the SSC and the Braille 'n Speak

are set, it is necessary to cable the two systems together. Plug the small 

end

of the Braille 'n Speak's interface cable into the serial port on the Braille 'n

Speak; closest to the battery charger jack. The 25 pin connector on the other

end of the Braille 'n Speak's interface cable can be plugged into the SSC

connector. If the Braille 'n Speak's interface cable is too short to

conveniently be plugged into the SSC c



onnector, it is possible to use a 

straight

through 25 pin serial cable as an extension. If the extension cable has male

connectors on both ends, as many printer cables do, you will need an RS232 

sex

change adapter from Radio Shack.



Braille 'n Speak and ProTERM



Now that the communications parameters have been matched and the cabling

has been worked out, it is possible to both upload Braille 'n Speak files into

the Apple and to download PRODOS Apple textfiles to the Braille 'n Speak. To

send Braille 'n Sp



eak files to ProTERM, activate the Braille 'n Speak's serial

port and turn ProTERM's capture buffer on. Use the transmit text commands 

on the

Braille 'n Speak to send the text to the Apple. To send Apple textfiles to the

Braille 'n Speak, turn on the Braille 'n Speak's serial port and use ProTERM's

transmit command.



*** Braille 'n Speak ProTERM and the Apple 2c



When ProTERM is loaded on the Apple 2c, it takes control of the built-in

serial ports. This allows one to set the communications parameters from the





Apple's keyboard. Set ProTERM to match the Braille 'n Speak's 

communications

parameters. The default parameters on the Braille 'n Speak are: 9600 baud, 8

data bits, 1 stop bit, and no parity. ProTERM expects software handshaking 

which

is the Braille 'n Speak's default setting as well. The Apple 2c serial ports

require a round nine pin din connector. This means that the Braille 'n Speak's

interface cable cannot be plugged into the serial port. An Apple 2c printer

cable must be used. One end of this cable h



as the necessary 9 pin connector

which plugs into serial port one on the Apple 2c. The other end has the 

standard

25 pin male RS232 connector. This connector should be plugged into an 

RS232 sex

change adapter. The other side of the sex change adapter is plugged into the

male side of the universal null modem adapter. The female side of the null 

modem

adapter is plugged into the Braille 'n Speak's interface cable. Both the

universal null modem and RS232 sex change adapters are available from 

Radio

Shack. 



Remember to turn on the Braille 'n Speak's serial port before 

attempting

communications with the Apple.



VersaBraille is a trademark of Telesensory Systems Inc.

BEX is a trademark of Raised Dot Computing, Inc.

ProTERM is a product of Microtalk of Louisville, Ky.





ÿ                       *** Using the Braille 'n Speak with BEX

              by Phyllis Herrington, David Holladay, and Caryn Navy



     By cabling the Braille 'n Speak to an Apple II computer, you can transfer

data between the two devices. The Braille 'n Speak is able to transmit data to

the Apple via the Input Through Slot option of BEX. Likewise, the Print option

of BEX enables you to send a file to the Braille 'n Speak. The only software

needed is BEX.



     \\h3 Equipment Requirements



     An Apple IIe or Apple IIgs requires a Super Serial Card for Input through

Slot. If you have an Apple IIc or and Apple IIc Plus, you use the printer port.

You also need the proper cables for interfacing the Braille 'n Speak to the

Apple.



     \\h3 Cabling and Interface Cards



     To cable the Braille 'n Speak's IO cable to the Super Serial Card, you need

a universal null modem adapter (RDC 3F cable) between the IO cable and the SSC

connector. To connect to an Apple IIc, you need a 2F cable and a 3F cable. To

connect to an Apple IIc plus, you need a 11F and a 3F cable.

x

     Set the Super Serial Card to RDC's standard parameters (see the separate

section on Serial Interfaces).



     \\h3 Braille 'n Speak to Apple



     Configure BEX at the User or Master Level. Answer yes to the question Do

you have a remote device to input through slot? Give the slot number for the

Super Serial Card (or the Apple IIc or IIc+ port) that you will be connecting to

the Braille 'n Speak. Press N to answer no to the automatic set-up sequence

question. Answer no to the question Is this a Kurzweil Reading Machine?



     Include in your configuration a printer for output to the Braille 'n Speak.

Define a printer using the same slot as your remote serial device. How you

configure this printer determines the format of the Braille 'n Speak file once

it's downloaded. If you want every BEX character, including

commands, in your Braille 'n Speak file, configure this printer as a class P -

Paperless brailler. It works well to define this transfer printer as a Thiel

brailler; then BEX underlining commands do not interfere with your Braille 'n

Speak data. If you avoid BEX underlining in the material that you send out, a

Generic printer is fine. Use the carriage width and form length of your choice.

If you want to keep form feed characters out of your data, use form length zero.



     Use Input through Slot on BEX's Second Menu to get BEX to listen to the

Braille 'n Speak. See User Level Section 12 in the BEX manual for more

information about Input through Slot. Once you supply a target chapter name and

press <CR>, BEX prompts you to start the transfer.



     Make sure the Braille 'n Speak is set for 8 data bits, 2 stop bits, no

parity, 9600 baud, and hardware handshaking. To set the Braille 'n Speak to 2

stop bits, enter chord-P S 2. If hardware handshaking does not work, change to

software handshaking.



                    *** Fun with the Blazie Engineering External Disk Drive: Part 1

                                  by Caryn Navy

 

     Phyllis Herrington introduced the Blazie Engineering External Disk Drive in

this Newsletter in the May/June 1991 issue. The external disk drive makes it

easy to pass material back and forth between the Braille 'n Speak and 3.5 inch

disks completely compatible with MS-DOS systems. I lusted after this device for

quite some time but regarded it as a luxury. Eventually, the desire to read

material from disk while taking care of our infant son convinced me to go ahead

and order the Blazie External Disk Drive. Several days after I sent my check to

Blazie Engineering, a fire swept through their production facility. So it was a

few more weeks before the UPS driver brought the long-awaited package from the

resilent folks at Blazie Engineering.

 

     It turns out that using the Braille 'n Speak and the external disk drive

while doing child care for my one-year-old is not as easy as I thought. He

thinks the Braille 'n Speak is a great toy!

 

     To use the Blazie External Disk Drive with serial devices other than the

Braille 'n Speak, you can buy an additional cable, the serial cable for the

external disk drive. I purchased this cable to try out some other uses for the

external disk drive.

 

                 Printing Directly from the External Disk Drive

 

     When I got the external disk drive, I was anxious to try to print material

directly from the drive to a serial printer, without making the material pass

through the Braille 'n Speak. That would make the external disk drive a very

portable device for printing MS-DOS files on a variety of printers located

anywhere around Raised Dot Computing, without tying up any computer. Since I had

forgotten to order the optional serial cable for the disk drive, I had to wait a

few more days before experimenting. Here is what I learned about printing

directly from the disk drive to a serial printer.

 

     When you connect the external disk drive to a serial device with the serial

cable, you can load files from disk into the serial device. The command for this

is {<control-E> L [filename] <CR>}. (Control-E is the command character for

serial operation of the disk drive, L is for load, and <CR> terminates serial

commands.) I hoped that loading a file into a serial printer would cause it to

be printed. The problem is that most serial printers, not designed to send

characters out, can't send the Load command to the disk drive. The trick is to

send the Load command from the Braille 'n Speak to the disk drive, make the disk

drive pause, recable the disk drive to the printer, and then give the disk drive

the signal that it's okay to start loading.

 

     The external disk drive uses software handshaking. This is a simple system

where the character control-S, sent as data, means "stop," and control-Q means

"okay to send." (I don't know of a good mnemonic for the letter Q here.)

 

     To print the file {BANANA.BFM} from the disk drive to the VersaPoint, I

began by writing on the Braille 'n Speak. I opened a new file in the Braille 'n

Speak and wrote {<control-E> L BANANA.BFM <CR> <control-S>}. Then I set the

Braille 'n Speak for 9600 baud, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit, and software

handshaking, and I turned on the serial port. I cabled the Braille 'n Speak

serial port to the disk drive, using the Braille 'n Speak I/O cable, a null

modem, and the serial cable for the disk drive. I turned on the disk drive and

transfered my short file with chord-T Z. I set the VersaPoint for 9600 baud, 8

data bits, and XON/XOFF handshaking (another name for software handshaking) and

switched to serial output. I turned on the VersaPoint and switched it off line.

Then I cabled the disk drive to the VersaPoint serial port, using the serial

cable for the disk drive and a male-to-male gender adapter. When I switched the

VersaPoint on line again, the VersaPoint began printing the file {BANANA.BFM}.

The braille came out with good format since the file was already formatted for

braille output by Hot Dots.

 

     Here is how this works. When you send the character control-S (the

handshake for stop) to the disk drive after the Load command, the disk drive

waits for a control-Q before loading the file to the device at the other end of

the serial cable. When the VersaPoint is set for software handshaking and you

switch it from off line to on line, it sends out the character control-Q to say,

"Okay, I'm ready to receive now." When the disk drive receives this control-Q

signal, it begins to load the file to the device at the other end of the serial

cable, which is now the VersaPoint.

 

     This method should work with any serial embosser or inkprint printer that

can operate at 9600 baud with software handshaking and can be switched between

off line and on line.

 

     We will cable up again in Part 2 to discuss transfering data between the

Blazie External Disk Drive and BEX.          
***
***  Fun with the Blazie Engineering External Disk Drive: Part 2

                                 by Caryn Navy

 

     When I got the Blazie disk drive, I worked out a method for transfering

files between it and BEX. This enables you to transfer material between BEX and

MS-DOS formats without having an MS-DOS machine, or without having one near your

Apple. It provides a method for backing up BEX chapters on large capacity disks.

By transferring BEX chapters to the Blazie disk drive, you can read them on the

Braille 'n Speak when you're away from your Apple. Here is how you can

accomplish transfers in both directions.

 

||h2

                            Cabling and Configuring

 

     On the Apple 2e or 2gs, use the Super Serial Card with RDC standard

settings (BEX Interface Guide, Section 6). To cable the Super Serial Card to the

Blazie disk drive, make a chain with a male to male gender adapter, a null

modem, and the serial cable for the Blazie disk drive. On an Apple 2c, use an

RDC 2M cable together with a null modem and the serial cable for the Blazie disk

drive.

 

     Set up a special BEX configuration at the master level for communicating

with the Blazie disk drive. I recommend setting up two special printers in this

configuration for working with the Blazie disk drive. Make one class G (generic

inkprint) with carriage width 80 and form length 0 and the following automatic

set-up sequence: {<control-I> 1 D <CR> <control-I> 7 P <CR> <control-I> X

<space> E <CR>} (13 characters). This automatic set-up sequence enables the

Super Serial Card to talk to the Blazie disk drive. If you are using an Apple 2c

instead of a Super Serial Card, use control-A in place of control-I in the above

sequence. Set up an additional printer which is class P (paperless brailler) and

has the same automatic set-up sequence. From here on, let's assume that the

generic inkprint printer is Printer 1 and the paperless brailler is Printer 2.

 

||h2

               Sending Material from BEX to the Blazie Disk Drive

 

     To save material from BEX on the Blazie disk drive in a file called

[filename], create a BEX chapter called {SEND} which contains the Save command

for the Blazie disk drive. This is {<control-E> S [filename] <CR>}. To create

control-E in the BEX Editor, press control-C followed by E. Don't type any

spaces or brackets in this sequence. Also create a BEX chapter called {Z} which

contains the single character control-Z. To print the material to the Blazie

disk drive, turn it on and print the chapters {SEND}, whatever chapters you want

to transfer, and {Z} from BEX. When BEX asks you "which printer?", respond with

1, the number for the special generic inkprint printer you set up for

communicating with the Blazie disk drive. The Blazie disk drive will whir. When

it has finished saving your material, it makes a short beep, and you can turn it

off. The text will be formatted with carriage width 80 and two carriage

return-linefeeds between paragraphs, and no form feeds. If you want instead to

save the text with all the BEX formatting commands and paragraph indicators

intact, use Printer 2, the special paperless brailler that you set up.

 

||h2

               Sending Material from the Blazie Disk Drive to BEX

 

     To send the file called [filename] from the Blazie disk drive to BEX, use

BEX's Input through slot option in the Second Menu. On the Apple, after typing

the BEX chapter name in which to store the material and <CR>, type {T

<control-B> P1 <control-E> L [filename] <CR>}. Don't type any spaces or brackets

in this sequence. This sends the appropriate Load command to the Blazie disk

drive; the Blazie disk drive should whir and BEX should hum happily. The letter

T brings up a special text mode which allows you to enter text from the keyboard

while using Input through slot. The control-B P 1 makes screen output go to

printer 1 as well, the special printer you set up for commands to the Blazie

drive. This control-B command works only at the master level. {<control-E> L

[filename] <CR>} loads material from file [filename] on the Blazie disk drive.

<CR> also terminates the special text mode in Input through slot.

 

     When the Blazie disk drive beeps and BEX stops humming, the transfer is

complete and you can turn off the disk drive. If you are using an Echo

synthesizer, the previous load command coincidentally told your Echo to speak in

letters; type {<control-E> W} to make the Echo speak in words again. Press Q on

the Apple to save the BEX chapter. Then type <control-B> P D} to stop sending

screen output to Printer 1.

 

     When you look at the BEX chapter you received, there will be a few extra

characters at the beginning, including the Load command you typed.

 

     I leave it to you to decide if this is a game for technology junkies or a

useful technique.

         *** Interfacing the Braille 'n Speak and VersaPoint

                     Robert Carter, Ph.D.

                                                 March 3, 1991



                         Introduction



     It is possible to connect the Braille 'n Speak directly to

the VersaPoint Braille embosser.  When the interface is properly

configured, the Braille 'n Speak user can easily and efficiently

use the VersaPoint to generate hardcopy braille from Braille 'n

Speak files.  This document will explain how to connect the two

devices.  Follow these step by step instructions to decrease the

likelihood of encountering problems.



                      What YOu Will Need



     Aside from the VersaPoint and Braille 'n Speak, you will

need the Braille 'n Speak interface cable and paper for the

VersaPoint.  No other equipment is needed.



             Step-By-Step Interfacing Instructions



1. Plug the 25 pin male Braille 'n Speak interface cable into

the female serial port on the VersaPoint.  This port is located

on the right side of the VersaPoint and is the second port

closest to the back of the printer.  Plug the other end of the

cable into the Braille 'n Speak's serial port.  This is the

second port on the left side of the Braille 'n Speak.



2. Set the communication parameters on the VersaPoint.  The

VersaPoint allows one to set and save the parameters by entering

commands using the VersaPoint's control panel.  There is

detailed information on how to use the control panel in the

VersaPoint owner's manual. REad this section before attempting

to make the following modifications.  The VersaPoint has the

ability to store five different configurations in its memory. 

These can be called upon when you use the VersaPoint with

different pieces of equipment.  I will use configuration 4 as

the one to be customized for this interface.  YOu can modify any

configuration that you like.  I chose 4 because only a few

parameters are likely to need modification.



3. To modify and save the parameters that make up configuration

number 4, do the following.  Make sure  that paper is loaded

into the VersaPoint.  You will need to turn the power on to load

the paper.  See the VersaPoint owner's manual if you need help

in loading the paper.  After the paper has been loaded, turn the

power off.  With the power still off, press down on the left

side of the rocker switch labeled "on" to put the VersaPoint in

online mode.  Next locate the "lf" button on the control panel. 

While holding down the "lf" button, reach around to the back of

the VersaPoint and turn on the power.  The VersaPoint will begin

printing out instructions.  It will tell you to use the "lf"

button to cycle through parameter options and to use the "ff"

button to record an option and move to the next menu item.  As

you work your way through this menu, the VersaPoint will display

settings and give you the opportunity to either change the

particular setting or to move on to the next item on the menu. 

If you wish to change a setting, press the "lf" button until the

VersaPoint prints out the desired value of that setting.  If you

want to leave a setting the way it is, simply press the "ff"

button.  Cycle through the possible options until your parameter

settings match those on the list presented below.  If you have

an older VersaPoint, all of these parameters will not be

available.  Do not worry about any parameters that do not appear

on your VersaPoint menu.  Simply match the ones that do appear

with this list.



language: u.s.a.

dots/cell: 6

reduced buffer off

dsp ext ascii

sideways printing: off

multiple copy: off

page length (inches): 11

left margin 0

right margin 40

line length: 40

line/page: 26

auto wraparound: off

auto line-feed: off

strobe low

busy high

interface: serial

baud rate: 9600

bits/char: 8

xon/xoff: on

dtr: low

dsr: off



When you press the "ff" button after this last parameter, you

will be back at the language parameter.  Press "tf" and the

VersaPoint will ask if you want to store setup 4.  Press "FF"

and press "tf."  This will cause the VersaPoint to print out the

message "end of setup."  At that point, the VersaPoint will be

using  the settings that you have just chosen.  In fact, it will

use these settings every time the power is turned on.  If you do

not want these settings to be the power on default, you can go

back into the menu and select another configuration to be the

default.  The VersaPoint manual explains exactly how this is

done.



4. It is now time to turn your attention to the Braille 'n

Speak.  Turn on the Braille 'n Speak and enter the status menu

with Chord-st; that is, the space bar and dots 3 and 4 pressed

simultaneously.  Use the dot 1 and dot 4 Chords to move around

in this menu.  Set the Braille 'n Speak for 9600 baud, 8 data

bits, 1 stop bit, no parity, software handshaking, append

linefeed when transmitting on, line length 40, page length 25,

and no left or top margins.  Exit the status menu and open the

file that you want to send to the VersaPoint.  If this is a

grade II braille file, type Chord-t followed by a "b" to print

the file.  The Braille 'n Speak manual discusses other print

possibilities.  Now that the interface is working, you need only

select that particular configuration, if it is not the default,

whenever you want to print directly from the Braille 'n Speak.             
***
***  
*** Interfacing Braille 'n Speak and Romeo

                     Robert Carter, Ph.D.



                                                 March 2, 1991



                         Introduction



     In addition to producing high-quality braille, the Romeo

braille embosser was designed to successfully interface with a

variety of microprocessor-based products.  The purpose of this

document is to explain how to interface the Romeo embosser with

the Braille 'n Speak.  Once this interface is working properly,

one can produce well formatted braille by plugging the Braille

'n Speak into the Romeo.  No other computer is needed.  A step

by step description of how to successfully accomplish this

interface will be presented.  Some familiarity with the Romeo

and the Braille 'n Speak will be assumed.  The owner's manuals

for both pieces of equipment should be read before attempting

this interface.



                      What YOu Will Need



     In addition to the Romeo and Braille 'n Speak, you will

need braille paper for the Romeo and a 25 pin female to female

sex change adapter for the Braille 'n Speak.  Such a gender

changer can be purchased in most computer stores.  Both the

Braille 'n Speak and the Romeo have 25 pin male connectors. 

They cannot be connected together without this adapter.



             Step-By-Step Interfacing Instructions



1. Attach the female to female gender changer to the Braille 'n

Speak interface cable.  Plug this cable into the serial port

located on the top right side of the Romeo.  There are two

ports.  Use the one closest to the Romeo's keypad.  Plug the

small end of the cable into the Braille 'n Speak's serial port. 

This is the second port on the left side (the port farthest from

you) of the Braille 'n Speak.



2.  Load paper into the Romeo.  If you do not know how to do

this, see section B of the Romeo owner's Manual.  



3. Turn on the Romeo.  You should hear the first few notes of

the theme from Romeo and Juliet.  This music lets you know that

the Romeo has performed its self test and is ready to accept

data.



4. Press the top right key on the Romeo keypad.  You will hear

two tones, a high one followed by a low one.  These tones

confirm the Romeo has been placed in command mode.  Once you are

in command mode, you can prepare the Romeo to accept data from

the Braille 'n Speak.



5. The Romeo is similar to the Braille 'n Speak in that you can

set the Romeo's communications parameters from its keyboard. 

It is possible to store as many as sixteen different sets of

parameters and to quickly change to a different set when using

the Romeo with different equipment.  Even though all sixteen

configurations can be changed, the first eight come set up for

the most popular computers.  The manual does not show one

designed especially for the Braille 'n Speak.  This is not a

problem.  Menu number 2 will work just fine with only one

modification.



6. To enter menu number 2, press the following key sequence on

the Romeo keypad: 0.2e; That is, the number zero, followed by

the decimal point, followed by the number 2, and finally the e

or enter key.  If you do not know where these keys are located,

read section c in the Romeo owner's manual.  After you enter

this key sequence, you should hear a couple of pleasant tones. 

If you hear a harsh buzz, you will know that the command was not

acceptable.  YOu probably made an error.  Simply try again.



7. The one parameter that must be changed in this menu is the

handshaking parameter, number 8.  This parameter needs to be set

to zero which represents software (or XON XOFF) handshaking.  To

set software handshaking, type the following keystrokes: 8.0e;

that is, the number eight, followed by the period or decimal

point, followed by zero, and ending with the e or enter key.  At

the end of this key sequence, you should hear the two pleasant

tones.  If you hear the harsh tone, try again.  To save this

change, clear the Romeo's buffer, exit edit mode, and return the

printer to its online state, enter the following keystrokes:

1.1e; that is, the number one, followed by point, followed by

the number one, followed by e for enter.  YOu should hear the

Romeo and Juliet theme.



8. If the other parameters in menu number 2 are set the way they

were set at the factory, you are ready to print from the Braille

'n Speak.  Since whenever parameters are changed the changes are

automatically saved, assuming that the other parameters are

still at their default settings may not be safe.  For this

reason, it is a good idea to print out the parameters that are

being used in menu number 2.  To do this, enter the following

keystrokes.  Press the top right key to put the Romeo back in

command mode.  You should hear a high tone followed by a low

tone.  Next type 0.2e; that is, zero, followed by point,

followed by the number two, and finally the e or enter key. 

After hearing the two pleasant tones, enter these keys: 2.ve;

that is, the number two, followed by the point, followed by the

v or view key, and ending with the e or enter key.  As soon as

this sequence is completed, the Romeo should print out the 31

parameters in this menu.  Compare your list of parameters to the

following list.  They should match exactly.  When the Romeo has

completed the printing of the parameters, press the e or enter

key two or three times or until you hear the two pleasant tones. 

Then press the form feed key to advance the paper so that the

printout of the parameters can be removed from the printer.

The following list is for menu 2.

The serial port is currently active.

The current baud rate is 9600.

8 data bits per character.

1 stop bit per character.

No parity selected.

The communications code is ASCII.

Printer busy is XON XOFF.

Automatic line feed after emboss is off.

Word wrap is off.

The perf skip is active.

Paper out detection is on.

NO line feed sent with a carriage return.

The right margin is column 42.

The left margin is column 1.

Do not emboss control characters.

Lines per page is 27.

The page length is 11.0 inches.

Do not emboss on plastic.

The control character table is empty.

The hot zone is off.

Do not respond to escape sequences.

The console bell point is 0.

The external keyboard is off.

The local echo is off.

6 dot computer braille is selected.

The 80-160 column mode is off.

The USA character set is selected.

No extended character set selected.

The 6 dot graphics set is selected.

The auto print setting is 0.



If these parameters do not match your printout, see section D in

the Romeo user's manual to learn how to change the ones that do

not match.



9. After changing any parameters that did not match, enter the

following key strokes to select menu 2 and to prepare the Romeo

to accept data from the Braille 'n Speak: 0.2e; that is, zero,

point, two, and e or enter.  Follow that sequence with 1.1e one,

point, one, and e for enter.  After this sequence of keys, you

should hear the Romeo and Juliet theme.  This means that the

printer is now using menu 2 and is ready for data to be sent

from the Braille 'n Speak.  Menu 2 will remain in effect until

you change to another menu or turn the power off.  If you wish

to make menu 2 the menu that gets selected each time the Romeo

is turned on, enter the following keystrokes: 0.2e; that is, the

number zero, followed by point, followed by the number two, and

then e or enter.  Follow that sequence with the following

commands: 1.0e; that is, the number one, followed by point,

followed by the number zero, and e for enter.  Remember that the

printer must be in command mode or offline before you can enter

these commands.  If you do not wish to set this menu up to be

the default menu, you will need to select menu 2 whenever you

wish to print directly from the Braille 'n Speak.  To select

menu 2, put the printer in command mode by pressing the top

right key until you hear a high tone followed by a low tone. 

Next type 0.2e; that is, zero, point, two, e for enter.  After

hearing the two pleasant tones, type 1.1e; that is, one, point,

one , e for enter.  This will tell the Romeo to use menu 2 for

this session.  Note that you do not have to reset the handshake

parameter each time.  This setting is saved in permanent memory. 

In other words, turning off the power does not cause the Romeo

to forget that menu 2 is now set up for software handshaking.



10. Now turn your attention to the Braille 'n Speak.  Power it

on and enter the status menu by typing Chord-st; that is, the

spacebar along with dots 3 and 4.  Once you are in the status

menu, make sure that the following parameters match your Braille

'n Speak settings.  All of the Braille 'n Speak parameters are

not listed here.  You will therefore need to use Chord-a and

Chord-dot 4 to move around this list and change any that do not

match.  You need 9600 baud, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit, no parity,

software handshaking, append line feeds when transmitting on,

line length 42, page length 26,top, left, and bottom margins

zero.  Note that the page length is set to 26.  This is one line

less than the Romeo setting of 27.  This is necessary for all

text to be printed.



11. After setting the correct parameters, exit the status menu

with Chord-e.  Open the file that you wish to have the Romeo

print.  If this is a braille file and you want grade two

braille, simply enter Chord-t followed by a b to have the entire

file printed.  See the Braille 'n Speak owner's manual for

information on other ways to transmit data out the serial port.
*** Interfacing Braille 'n Speak

                  with IBM-Compatible Computers



                       Craig Werner, Ph.D.



                        November 23, 1991







                          Introduction



     In order to communicate in a truly interactive mode with

IBM-compatible (also called MS-DOS) computers--that is, in order

to send commands to these machines and read the responses to

these commands--you must use a speech software package with your

Braille 'n Speak.  Several such packages are available from

Blazie Engineering.  However, it is possible to transfer ASCII

textfiles between the Braille 'n Speak and these computers.  







                       What You Will Need



     In order to transfer files to and from your Braille 'n

Speak, you will need the serial interface cable supplied by

Blazie Engineering.  Since the end of the cable you will plug

into your computer ends in a male connector, and since the

connector on your computer is probably also male, you will need a

splicer, sometimes called a sex adapter, consisting of two female

connectors wired together.  Plug one end of the splicer into your

interface cable and the other into one of the serial ports of

your computer.  If the connector on your computer is as long as

the plug at the end of the interface cable, you'll need a 25-pin

to 25-pin adapter; if it is shorter, you'll probably need a 9-pin

to 25-pin adapter.



     If you only wish to send files from your PC to the Braille

'n Speak, you will not need any other software except DOS,

although you may wish to use a telecommunications program to

perform the transfer.  Reputable programs are Telix, ProComm,

{COMMO{, and Qmodem.  If you wish to send files from the Braille

'n Speak to your PC, you will either need a telecommunications

package or SAVER, a shareware offering from Blazie Engineering

available free to its customers and for $10 to non-customers. 

The documentation for using SAVER is not included here as it

comes with the software.  Sending files from the Braille 'n Speak

to a PC via the DOS "COPY" command produces highly unpredictable

results, so this procedure is not recommended.







                    Step-by-Step Instructions



     Steps 1 and 2 should be followed regardless of the direction

in which you are transferring files.



     1.  Connect your Braille 'n Speak to your PC using the

interface cable and the splicer.



     2.  Set Braille 'n Speak parameters to the following values: 

baud 9600; data bits 8; parity n; stop bits 1; handshake s;

interactive n.







                     From PC to BNS via Dos



     3.  Create a filename on your Braille 'n Speak under which

to store the data from your PC.  To make sure you have enough

room for all the data, you may wish to make the file size

somewhat larger than you think is adequate.  You can always free

the unused pages later using the "S" command in the Braille 'n

Speak's File Command Menu.  Make sure you create this file with

your Braille translator set to "off."  If you want strings of

repeated characters, such as asterisks, to be received without

the Braille 'n Speak's truncating them to a string of three, make

sure the "reject ornamentation characters" option in the Status

Menu is set to "off."



     4.  Turn on the Braille 'n Speak's serial port.



     5.  With your PC at the DOS prompt, type the word "COPY"

followed by a space, the name of the file you wish to copy,

another space, and the name of the communications port to which

you have your Braille 'n Speak connected.  End the command with a

colon and a press of the <ENTER> key.



     Suppose you wish to copy the file "HELLO.TXT" to your

Braille 'n Speak, which is connected to Com 1.  You would type



COPY HELLO.TXT COM1: <ENTER>.



     6.  With the Braille 'n Speak's Interactive Mode off, you

may hear a faint buzzing or static as the file is sent.  To check

to see if data is indeed being received, turn on Interactive

Mode.  Note, however, that it is a good idea to keep this mode

off as much as possible in order to speed up the transfer

process.  Your computer will give no indication that the transfer

has been completed, so you will have to check periodically to see

if data is still coming into your Braille 'n Speak.



     7.  If the file you have sent is garbled when you read it

with your Braille 'n Speak, your PC's serial port is probably not

set to the values the Braille 'n Speak is expecting.  If this is

the case, you will have to set them with the DOS "MODE.COM"

program before you send files.  To invoke this program, make sure

you are logged into your DOS directory or that you have a path

set to allow you to access DOS commands from any directory in

your system.  Then type the word "MODE" followed by a space and

the name of the communications port to which you have your

Braille 'n Speak connected.  Type a colon, and end your command

with the data bits, parity, and stop bits values that the

Braille 'n Speak is set to, all separated by commas; finally,

press your <ENTER> key.



     Suppose your Braille 'n Speak is connected to Com 1.  You

would type



MODE COM1:9600,8,N,1 <enter>.







         From PC to BNS via Telecommunications Software



     8.  Make sure your telecommunications software is sending to

the same communications port to which your Braille 'n Speak is

connected.  The software's baud rate, parity, data bits, and stop

bits values should be set as in Step 2.  Note that "software

handshake" will probably be called "XON/XOFF handshake" or

"XON/XOFF flow control" in your telecommunications software's

setup routine.



     9.  Invoke your telecommunications program, and place it in

Terminal Mode.



     10.  Turn on your Braille 'n Speak.  Note that turning on

your Braille 'n Speak before invoking your telecommunications

program may cause the software's modem installation string to be

sent to a file.



     11.  Create a filename on your Braille 'n Speak under which

to store the data from your PC.  To make sure you have enough

room for all the data, you may wish to make the file size

somewhat larger than you think is adequate.  You can always free

the unused pages later using the "S" command in the Braille 'n

Speak's File Command Menu.  Make sure you create this file with

your Braille translator set to "off."  If you want strings of

repeated characters, such as asterisks, to be received without

the Braille 'n Speak's truncating them to a string of three, make

sure the "reject ornamentation characters" option in the Status

Menu is set to "off."



     12.  Turn on your Braille 'n Speak's serial port.



     13.  Send the file from your PC to the Braille 'n Speak. 

You will first have to give the telecommunications software's

"send file" or "upload file" command and then specify you are

sending via the ASCII protocol.  Consult the manual of your

telecommunications program for these commands.  With the Braille

'n Speak's Interactive Mode turned on, you will hear the text of

the file coming into your Braille 'n Speak.  If you wish to speed

up the transfer, turn Interactive Mode off.  If you have the

alarm enabled in your telecommunications software, your PC should

beep when the file has been sent.  If the alarm is off, you will

have to check the status of the file periodically by turning the

Braille 'n Speak's Interactive Mode on.







         From BNS to PC via Telecommunications Software



     14.  Make sure your telecommunications software is sending

to the same communications port to which your Braille 'n Speak is

connected.  The software's baud rate, parity, data bits, and stop

bits values should be set as in Step 2.  Note that "software

handshake" will probably be called "XON/XOFF handshake" or

"XON/XOFF flow control" in your telecommunications software's

setup routine.



     15.  Invoke your telecommunications program, and place it in

Terminal Mode.



     16.  Turn on your Braille 'n Speak, and open the file you

wish to send.  Note that turning on your Braille 'n Speak before

invoking your telecommunications program may cause the software's

modem installation string to be sent to a file.



     17.  You should set the "append linefeed when transmitting"

parameter in the Status menu to "on."  If you wish the lines of

your file to be a certain length, and if your word processor or

file viewer will not format your text to the line length you

desire, change the "line length" parameter in the Braille 'n

Speak's Status Menu to the value you wish.  Note also that if you

do not want page numbers to appear in the file, you must turn

page numbering off from the Status Menu.  



     18.  Tell your telecommunications program you wish to

receive a file.  You will first have to give the "receive file"

or "download file" command and then specify you are receiving via

the ASCII protocol.  Consult the manual of your

telecommunications program for these commands. 



     19.  Make sure your Braille 'n Speak's cursor is at the

start of the file.  Then, send the file with the command "T-Chord

Z."  Note that long files will take some time to send as the

telecommunications software will probably have to handshake

periodically with the Braille 'n Speak.  If your Braille

translator is set to "on," all contractions will be expanded (the

"ING-sign" will become the letters "I, N, G); however, this

process will be time-consuming and may even result in undesirable

formatting of the file in some cases.



     When the file has been sent, the Braille 'n Speak will say

"OK.  However, you may have to press your <ESCAPE> key to tell

your telecommunications package that the file transfer is

complete.

*** Interfacing Braille 'n Speak and Modems



                       Craig Werner, Ph.D.



                         March 17, 1991



                          Introduction







     A modem is a device which allows the sending and receiving

of data to and from a remote computer using a standard telephone

line.  The Braille 'n Speak can be used interactively with a

modem; that is, commands can be sent to a host computer, and the

data resulting from these commands can be spoken by the Braille'

n Speak and stored in its memory.  The Braille 'n Speak can

transmit and receive standard ASCII text only.  No binary file

transfers are possible.  The interface instructions which follow

apply only to the most common type of modem, the serial

asynchronous external modem.  Note that you should omit the

quotation marks in this text when typing the commands in these

instructions.



                       What You Will Need







     In addition to the Braille 'n Speak and the modem, you will

need the Braille 'n Speak's serial interface cable and a 25-pin

female to male null modem adaptor.  A null modem adaptor

consists of two RS-232 connectors with their transmit and receive

pins crossed.  It is available from computer stores or as part of

 an interface kit sold by Blazie Engineering.



                    Step-by-Step Instructions







     1.  Plug the interface cable into the Braille 'n Speak's

serial port.  This is the second port on the left side (the 

port farthest from you) of the Braille 'n Speak.  Connect the

female end of the null modem adaptor to this interface cable and

the male end to the modem.



     2.  Connect the modem to the telephone line.  Consult your

modem user's manual for instructions on how to do this.



     3.  Turn on the Braille 'n Speak and the modem.



     4.  Create or open a Braille 'n Speak file in which the

data you receive from the remote computer will be stored.  Make

sure the file is large enough to allow for all data to be saved. 

You may wish to create a larger file than the one you think you

will need, just to be safe.  You can always shrink the size of

the file later by using the "S" command in the file command menu.



     5.  Make sure the Braille 'n Speak's parameters match those

of the modem and the host computer.  Note, however, that

settings of eight data bits and no parity are suggested even if

the host computer desires seven bits and even parity.  The other

critical parameters are baud rate, duplex, linefeeds, and

handshaking. Handshaking should almost invariably be set to

"software" or"XON-XOFF."  The "append linefeeds when

transmitting" parameter should most likely be set to "off."



     6.  Turn on the Braille 'n Speak's serial port.



     7.  Turn on the Braille 'n Speak's interactive mode by

pressing "Chord-g" until you hear the words "interactive OK."



     8.  Type any command that will generate a response from the

modem.  If the modem is at least partially compatible with the

Hayes command set (and most are nowadays), type the command "AT"

and press <RETURN>.  Only recent modems accept this command when

it is typed in lower-case letters, so you may have to issue it

using capital letters.  If the modem responds with "OK," the

interface is successful.



     9.  If the modem does not respond, first review Steps 5

through 8 to make sure you have carried them out correctly.



     10.  If the modem still does not respond, its Data Control

Detect (or DCD) line will have to be set to high.  To do this,

you will have to issue the command "AT&C1" and press <RETURN>.

However, since the Braille 'n Speak cannot presently communicate

with the modem, you will have to use other equipment, such as a

computer and telecommunications software, to send this command.

If your modem has non-volatile memory, you can save this command

so that it is remembered whenever the modem is switched on.  To

save the command to the modem's memory, type the command "AT&W"

and press <RETURN>.

*** Interfacing the Braille 'n Speak Disk Drive

               with the VersaBraille II or II Plus



                       Craig Werner, Ph.D.



                           May 5, 1991







                          Introduction



     This article is somewhat different from the others in this

guide.  It does not treat interfacing the Braille 'n Speak with

another device; rather, it treats interfacing the Braille 'n

Speak's optional disk drive with other devices:  the VersaBraille

II and VersaBraille Classic by Telesensory Systems, Inc.  In

fact, the Braille 'n Speak disk drive can be interfaced with a

wide range of devices having a standard serial port.  The drive

uses standard 3 1/2-inch disks of either double density (720K) or

high density (1.4M) format.



     True, some models of the VersaBraille are furnished with a

disk drive; unfortunately, the drive works according to a TSI-

proprietary format, which means that disks formatted under MS-

DOS, the standard system used by IBM and IBM-compatible

computers, cannot be read at all with the VersaBraille.  The

Braille 'n Speak disk drive affords a way for the VersaBraille

user to read MS-DOS-generated text files using the VersaBraille,

and it also affords a way of sending VersaBraille-generated text

to a disk that can be read on an IBM-compatible computer.  In

short, a VersaBraille user can now access IBM-compatible disks

with a VersaBraille without using an IBM-compatible computer. 

However, it is very important to remember that these disks must

contain only straight ASCII text information.  The user cannot

use the Braille 'n Speak disk drive and the VersaBraille to run

IBM-compatible programs, such as a word processor or a database.







                       What You Will Need



     In addition to the Braille 'n Speak disk drive and either a

VersaBraille II or Classic, you will need the disk drive's and

VersaBraille's interface cables supplied with the units.  Do not

use the short cable employed to connect the drive to the Braille

'n Speak's auxiliary port; rather, use the longer cable supplied

with the drive to connect to the VersaBraille.







                    Step-by-Step Instructions



                           Connections



     1.  Connect the 15-pin male end of the disk drive interface

cable to the drive's port.



     2.  If your VersaBraille's interface cable has a 25-pin

male connector, plug this end directly into the 25-pin female end

of the drive's interface cable.



     3.  If your VersaBraille cable has a 25-pin female

connector, connect a male-to-male adaptor between the drive's

interface cable and the VersaBraille's interface cable.  Such an

adaptor is supplied as part of Blazie Engineering's optional

interface kit.  It is also readily available from many computer

stores.



     4.  Plug the other end of the VersaBraille's interface cable

into the VersaBraille's serial port.  On the VersaBraille II,

this port is the connector closest to the disk port.  On the

VersaBraille II Plus, it is the port closest to the on/off

switch.  On the VersaBraille Classic, it is the long port closest

to the power supply connector.



                            Settings



     5.  Regardless of which VersaBraille you use, set its serial

parameters to 9600 baud, eight data bits, one stop bit, and

software (XON-XOFF) handshaking.  you may wish to set the duplex

parameter to "half" to monitor your typing.  How you set the

ASCII and carriage return parameters will determine whether you

see control characters and carriage returns in your output.



     6.  If you are using a VersaBraille II or II Plus and wish

to enable full two-way communication between the VersaBraille

II/II Plus and the Braille 'n Speak disk drive, you should turn

on VB emulation from the "c:com" mode menu.  This emulation will

allow you to send messages to the drive and to read messages from

the drive on the VersaBraille display.



     7.  If you are using a VersaBraille Classic, make sure the

terminal overlay has been loaded with the following suggested

CCP settings:



b 9600

d 8

p n

s 1

t c

c y or space

et fs

dx h

hs dc3

ai n

co cr

ak n

dci y

cts n

cd n



     8.  If you are using a VersaBraille Classic, you should also

turn on remote mode with a "CHORD-R R."



                   Commands and Error Messages



     9.  Commands sent to the disk drive require a "Control-E"

before them.  Although all commands are a single letter, some

need additional information after them.  Most require that a

carriage return (Control-M) be sent before they are executed. 

Since TSI has used different methods at different times to send a

control character, you should check your VersaBraille manual to

determine how a control character should be sent.  To format a

disk, for example, send the control character prefix (check your

VersaBraille manual to see which dots you must type) followed by

an "E" and an "F."  Since the "format" command does not need a

carriage return, the formatting process will begin immediately. 

To have a directory of the disk's files displayed to your

VersaBraille, type a Control-E followed by a "D" and a carriage

return.  The directory ends with the date of the drive's

firmware.  For a complete list of Braille 'n Speak disk drive

commands, consult the disk drive's manual.



     10.  The disk drive sends error codes in the form of single

characters.  For a complete list of Braille 'n Speak disk drive

error messages, consult the disk drive's manual.



         From BNS Disk Drive to VersaBraille II/II Plus



     11.  With the VersaBraille's terminal mode enabled and the

Braille 'n Speak's disk drive off, enter the serial.in mode by

typing the letters "f p i" followed by the "execute" command.



     12.  Turn on the VersaBraille and Braille 'n Speak disk

drives.



     13.  Load the file you wish to transfer by typing a

"Control-E" followed by an "L" and the name of the file you wish

to load.  Do not use spaces in this command.  If you type a

carriage return, the file will be stored in the VersaBraille's

RAM as "VERSABRL.SAV."  Only short files may be stored this way,

and the results of this command are not always favorable. 

Therefore, do not type the carriage return after the file name.



     14.  Instead, type a "CHORD-R" to exit terminal mode. 

Return to the main menu, and turn off VB emulation.



     15.  Return to the serial mode by typing the letters "f p i"

and the "execute" command.



     16.  With VB emulation still turned off, the VersaBraille

will display the prompt "enter filename."  Enter the name you

would like the VersaBraille to store as the name of the file you

will transfer from the disk drive.  Follow it with the number of

the VersaBraille drive on which you wish the file to be stored.



     17.  Type the "execute" command in response to the "send

command?" prompt.  Follow it with a carriage return and another

"execute" command to begin the transfer.



     18.  If the transfer is working properly, you should hear

the VersaBraille beep each time a 512-character block is

received.  If it beeps only once, and you know the file is

greater than 512 characters, you have probably typed an incorrect

command.  Abort the attempt by typing a "CHORD-Z," and begin the

transfer process again.



         From VersaBraille II/II Plus to BNS Disk Drive



     19.  Make sure the disk in the Braille 'n Speak disk drive

contains enough free space for the file you wish to transfer.



     20.  Type a "Control-E" followed by an "S" and the name of

the file you wish to save.  Do not use spaces in this command.



     21.  Type a "CHORD-R" to exit serial.in mode, and select "s

prints."



     22.  You will now be asked if you wish to format the file. 

If your work will be viewed by people expecting a standardized

ASCII text format, you will want to include carriage returns at

the end of lines so that lines do not overprint each other.  You

will also want to eliminate any special signs, such as dollar

signs, sometimes used in VersaBraille files.  If the file you are

sending is already formatted for a normal look, then answer "no"

to the format question.  It is not necessary to pause between

pages, so answer "no" to the question asking if a pause is

necessary.  When the file has finished printing (in this case it

is actually being saved to disk), the message "done" will appear

on the VersaBraille display.



     23.  Unless the file ends with the standard ASCII end-of-

file character, you must return to terminal mode, and type a

"Control-Z."  This command ends and saves the file.



           From BNS Disk Drive to VersaBraille Classic



     24.  Load the VersaBraille Classic's terminal overlay, open

a chapter, and enter the remote mode with a "CHORD-R R."



     25.  Send the Braille 'n Speak disk file by typing a

"Control-E" followed by an "L" and the name of the file you wish

to send.  Do not use spaces in this command.  When the

VersaBraille's buffer fills, you will hear a double beep.  Type

the "next page" command so the next segment of the

VersaBraiille's cassette may be accessed.  When you hear no more

beeps, you will know the file has been sent.  If you wish to

save the file automatically without giving "next page" commands,

use the "CHORD-R T" command.



           From VersaBraille Classic to BNS Disk Drive



     26.  Make sure the disk in the Braille 'n Speak disk drive

contains enough free space for the file you wish to transfer.



     27.  With the VersaBraille's terminal overlay loaded and

with the serial port turned on using the "Chord-R R" command,

type "Control-E" followed by an "S" and the name of the file you

wish to save.  Do not use spaces in this command.



     28.  Load the VersaBraille's hardcopy overlay, and make sure

all formatting parameters are set properly before you send the

file.  The file should not contain any special VersaBraille

signs if it is to be viewed by a person not familiar with them.



     29.  Send the file using the VersaBraille's "CHORD-R I"

command.  When the file is finished transmitting, the message

"done" will appear on the VersaBraille's display.



     30.  Unless the file ends with the standard ASCII end-of-

file character, you must load the terminal overlay, enter remote

mode, and type a "Control-Z" to save the file to the Braille 'n

Speak disk drive.



                            Lock-ups



     31.  From time to time, the VersaBraille may lock up while

sending or receiving data.  If the display freezes, or if a

transfer operation has ceased, try the following steps:  (1) type

a "Control-Q"; (2) turn the Braille 'n Speak's disk drive off and

on again; (3) disconnect and reconnect the interface cable; (4)

exit terminal mode and begin the transfer process again.

             *** ACCESS PC DISKS FROM YOUR VBII or CLASSIC



                         By David Goldstein



     VersaBraille users now have a way to exchange files with IBM 

PC users, thanks to a new all-purpose disk drive from Blazie 

Engineering.  Designed principally for the Braille 'n Speak, this 

little box, measuring 5-1/2 by 8-1/2 by 2 inches and costing $495,

can connect to a VersaBraille or any device that has a standard 

serial port, and will serve as a disk storage and retrieval system

for that device.  The disks used are the VersaBraille-sized 

3-1/2-inch floppies, but in the standard format used on IBM PC's 

equipped with this sized drive.  Disks made on the 

battery-operated drive may be read on a PC, and PC disks may be 

read on the drive and transferred to the VersaBraille.  The disks 

can be either low density, 720K, or the high density 1.2 Meg.  The

drive cannot read Apple PRODOS disks.



     For the VersaBraille user who does not have a computer, the 

Blazie disk drive eliminates the need to transfer files by cabling

the VersaBraille to a computer or by using Cornucopia Software's 

IBM-VBII program.



     It is important to understand the disk drive's limitations.  

It does not replace the disk drive in the VersaBraille II.  The 

drive is connected to the serial port, so that information must be

sent or received from it as with a serial printer or modem.  Even 

at 9600 BAUD, transfers are slow.  If you use it to read a long PC

file, you will be subject to the same constraints as with long 

VersaBraille files.  The drive cannot read information from 

compressed files.  You will be able to read the straight ASCII 

files generated by Computerized Books for the Blind and download 

them to your VersaBraille, but you will not be able to read the 

compressed files in which the dictionary and catalogs are normally

packaged for PC users.  CBFB has always shown a willingness to 

accommodate users' needs, and I have no doubt that arrangements 

could be worked out to receive most, if not all, of the files in 

uncompressed form.  It should also be made clear that you cannot 

use this drive to run programs written for the PC.  If you were 

hoping to use it to run WordPerfect on your VersaBraille, you will

be disappointed.  In fact, you cannot read files generated by 

WordPerfect unless they have been saved in an ASCII "nondocument" 

mode.



     This article provides instructions on how to use the drive 

with the VersaBraille II and VersaBraille Classic.  It can also be

read as a product review.  I wish to thank Blazie Engineering for 

the loan of the device to VersaNews for the purpose of writing 

this article.



Hooking Up



     The back of the disk drive contains the power switch and 

connectors for the power supply/battery charger and the interface 

cable which connects to the VersaBraille.



     With regard to the power supply (which is identical to that 

used by Braille 'n Speak), it is recommended that you use the disk

drive plugged in as much as possible.  The batteries are supposed 

to last 5 to 10 hours, but you don't want to be caught in a 

situation where there is not enough power to save your files to 

disk.  With the December update, the drive will start beeping 

continuously when the batteries are becoming dangerously low.  The

drive will also beep if left turned on for 5 minutes without being

used.  As with many battery-operated devices, the drive gets its 

power through the battery even when it is charging.  If the 

batteries are low or you have not used the drive in a long time, 

it is best to let it charge for a while before using it plugged 

in.  A full charge takes 8 hours.



     Cabling.  Be sure, when unpacking the unit, that you have the

right cable.  There is a short cable specifically for the Braille 

'n Speak's auxiliary port, but there should also be another much 

longer one for connecting to other devices.  This has a 15-pin 

male connector to plug into the drive, and a 25-pin female 

connector on the other end.



     Note that the disk drive will not turn on unless the cable is

plugged into it.  This is a safety feature to prevent the power 

from being turned on in transit.  Be sure to plug in the cable 

securely.  You may wish to tighten the screws on the connector to 

make sure that a slight pull on the cable dosn't turn the disk 

drive off in mid operation.



     The 25-pin end of the cable will plug directly into the male 

connector at the end of the VersaBraille II cable.  The disk drive

is a "DCE" device, meaning that it connects up to things as a 

modem would.  If you have a VersaBraille II Plus, you should plug 

the VersaBraille cable into the port closest to the on/off switch.

On the VersaBraille II, use the connector next to the disk port.  

The Classic requires no null modem adapter.  If your Classic has a

cable ending in a male, you can connect the disk drive cable 

directly.  If your Classic cable ends with a female connector, you

will need a straight-through, male-to-male adapter to go between 

the two cables.



Parameters



     The disk drive requires 9600 BAUD, 8 data bits, no parity and

one stop bit.  Deane Blazie recommends software handshaking.



     VersaBraille II.  We begin, as other writers do, with the 

assumption that the machine has been set to its original defaults.

This is achieved by a full reset--holding down dots 1-2-3 while 

turning on the power.  From that point, only a few parameters need

to be changed.  In the s: serial menu, set:

p: parity none (The default parity setting of "ignor" on the model

L1D seems to work just as well.)

i: dc in y

o: dc out y.

You may also wish to set d: duplex to Half so that you can see 

what you are typing.

In the c: com mode menu you should set the C carriage return, and 

A, ASCII parameters for whether you want to be able to see 

carriage returns or control characters in the output.



     VB Classic.  With the VersaBraille Classic, it is suggested 

you load the terminal overlay and set the CCP's as follows.  Only 

the parameters pertaining to the disk drive are given here:

b 9600; d 8; p n; s 1; t c; ci y or space; et fs; dx h; hs dc3; ai

n; co cr; ak n; dci y; cts n; cd n.

Put the machine in remote mode with an r-chord r and use this mode

to send the disk drive commands discussed below.  You can read 

short files in this mode and use x-chord s when the buffer fills. 

For longer files, use the automatic transfer functions r-chord t 

to save a disk file to tape, and r-chord i to transfer a tape 

chapter to disk.



Operating the Drive from a VBII



     There is one more parameter you need to set if you wish to 

hold two-way communication with the disk drive.  You must go to 

the c: com mode parameter and set v: vb emulate to On.  This sets 

up the VersaBraille for an interactive or terminal mode, permits 

you to send commands to an external device and see messages from 

that device on your display.  To get into this mode itself, you 

must go to the main menu, and type f for files, p for print, i for

serial.in, and press Execute.  If you have done it correctly, you 

will see the cursor on the first cell of the display.  If the 

message "destroys ram fls" appears, push Execute again.



     Now you can talk to your disk drive.  You won't find it much 

of conversationalist.  Unlike a computer, it does not give you 

prompts to tell you that it's ready for the next command.  It will

give a doorbell sound and send an "at" sign @ when you turn the 

power on.  It will also beep upon completing a command.  You will 

see a control-z after each operation if you have turned on the 

ASCII parameter.  Braille 'n Speak is programmed to speak error 

messages in regular English.  When using other devices, errors are

noted with a terse single character.  If the command you send does

not exist, it returns ?.  If it cannot find a file, it says #.  If

you try to "kill" all files at once, which it considers 

illegal--not to mention immoral, it sends an emphatic ".  A 

complete chart of error messages will be found at the end of this 

article.



     Commands are entered by preceding them with a control-e. 

(This is the equivalent of an s chord from the Braille 'n Speak's 

disk menu.) On the VersaBraille, you would enter a command by 

typing a dots 4-5-chord and the letter e, and then the letter of 

the command.  Do not space between the control-e and the command. 

For example, control-e followed by the letter f will format the 

disk.  Most commands require more information after them, and the 

sequence must end with a carriage return (control-m) before 

something happens.  Format does not require a return and starts 

immediately and irrevocably.  Beware! By the way, the drive 

determines whether a disk should be formatted for high or low 

density by looking for the extra hole found on high density disks.



     An example of a command that requires a carriage return is 

the Directory command, d, which gives you a listing of files on 

the disk.  If you type control-e d, carriage return, you will see 

all the files.  If you type ctrl-ed*.brl <return>, you will get a 

list of just the files with the .brl extension.  The directory 

always concludes by displaying the date of the drive's firmware.



     It is a good idea to test things out before getting to work 

with the disk drive.  The easiest way to do this is by asking it 

for a directory of the disk.  If you receive the directory on your

display, you know that communication is working.



     I have found that the disk drive and VersaBraille often lock 

up when they are connected together.  If you type on the VB and 

get no response, try one or all of the following: (1) type a 

control-q; (2) unplug the interface cable from the VersaBraille; 

(3) turn the drive's power switch off and on; (4) exit and and 

return to terminal mode with an r chord and Execute.  I suspect 

this lockup problem is caused by the drive's sending control 

characters to the VersaBraille.  Experiments with hardware 

handshaking did not improve matters.



     Command List.  The disk drive recognizes the following 

commands.  All of these must be preceded by a control-e.

l load a file

s save a file

d directory

k "kill" or delete a file; k*.* is illegal.

f format

m make a new subdirectory

x delete a subdirectory (the directory must be empty of all files 

before it can be deleted.)



Transferring Files from the PC Disk to the VersaBraille



     Let's say you have a PC disk with text files.  You want to 

know what files it contains and then will put one of those files 

on a VersaBraille disk so you can read it later.



     1.  Get into terminal mode by turning the VB-Emulate 

parameter on and typing f, p, i and Execute from the main menu.



     2.  Turn on the disk drive.



     3.  Do a directory, control-e d followed by a carriage 

return.



     4.  You now want to "load" a file from the disk.  Type 

control-e l and the name of the file without spaces between the 

control-e or the filename.  Do not type carriage return yet.  If 

you type a return, the file will be sent to your VersaBraille 

display and stored in RAM as versabrl.sav.  Those of you who have 

used the VersaBraille as a terminal know that files of only about 

10 K can be stored this way, and the result is not always 

reliable.  You can certainly read short files this way if you want

to see what is on them, but you are much better off storing the 

files to disk.



     5.  After you have entered the complete command sequence with

the exception of the carriage return, do an r-chord to get out of 

terminal mode.  Return to the VersaBraille's main menu, and go 

from there to the Parameters menu.  Shut VB-Emulate off.



     6.  Return to the serial.in state by typing f, p, i and 

Execute.  With VB-Emulate off, the VersaBraille will display, 

"enter filename." Enter the name that you would like this file to 

be stored as, and select the drive number.



     7.  The VersaBraille will then prompt, "send command?" Type 

Execute for yes.  You have entered most of the command, but you 

still have to add the finishing carriage return.  Type a return, 

and another Execute to get things started.



     8.  If things are working correctly, you will hear the disk 

drive start up and the VersaBraille begin beeping after every 512 

characters have been sent.  Because the disk drive sends a 

control-z at the completion of each command, the completed file 

will be saved to your VersaBraille disk automatically without your

needing to send a z chord.  If the VersaBraille just beeps once 

and nothing happens afterwards, you probably made a mistake and 

will need to get out by typing a z-chord and starting the 

procedure over.



Transferring a VersaBraille File to the PC Disk



     1.  Get into terminal mode and do a directory to make sure 

things are working and that there is room on the disk for a new 

file.



     2.  You are going to "save" a file to disk, so type control-e

s and the name of the file without any spaces between the 

control-e, the command and the filename.  Type carriage return.  

This will put the drive in a waiting mode, and it will receive all

characters sent to it until the file is closed.



     3.  Do an r chord to leave serial.in mode and select s 

prints.



     4.  Now go through the usual procedure for printing.  You 

will have to decide whether you want the file to be formatted.  

Remember that the reason you are transferring the file to PC disk 

is so that it can be read by people who have standard equipment.  

You will therefore need carriage returns in the file, and you 

won't want any dollar-sign commands known only to VersaBraille and

Navigator.  So if your file has these symbols and is without 

carriage returns, say Yes to the formatting question.  If it is 

already set up for computer transfer and has carriage returns, 

then the answer would be No. (One case where you might not want to

format a file containing VersaBraille symbols is if you plan to 

use the disk on Navigator in its VBPC mode.)



     5.  As you continue through the printing procedure, you will 

eventually be asked whether you want to pause between pages.  You 

do not, so press any key except Execute.  When the file finishes 

printing, the message "done" will appear.



     6.  You still need to tell the disk drive to close the file. 

Return to terminal mode and type control z.



Subdirectories.



     Disks produced on PC's often have files in subdirectories, 

and you can only see these files if you access the proper 

subdirectory.  The disk drive accepts the PC's backslash command. 

(On the VersaBraille this is entered by writing dots 1-2-5-6 

preceded by a k chord for uppercase.)  You can load, save, or get 

a directory of the files in a subdirectory by following a command 

with the subdirectory name.  For example, if you were using this 

disk drive to read the PC edition of VersaNews and wanted to read 

the braille version of this article in the \brl subdirectory, you 

would  write a control-e foll[$ by \brl\diskdriv.  Unfortunately, 

if you don't know ahead of time the names of the subdirectories on

the disk, there is no way to find out.  Displaying the root 

directory does not list subdirectory names, and there is no 

equivalent of the MS-DOS TREE command to get a path listing.



Error Messages



     Here are all the error codes you might see the disk drive 

send.

# file not found

! write protected disk

& format, CRC, or sector failure

% insufficient disk space

" illegal, sent when you try to kill *.*

$ no disk in drive

+ subdirectory already exists

- subdirectory does not exist

/ subdirectory not empty.



Conclusions.



     This disk drive could be a godsend to those who do not have a

PC and need to exchange text files with coworkers.  At $495 it is 

rather expensive, but it is less costly and requires far less 

learning than a computer.  With the firmware I have, dated 

December 1990, there still seem to be problems with absolutely 

perfect compatibility.  I was not able to read certain disks 

generated by a computer, and other people have reported their 

computers not being able to read all disks generated on the drive.

My unit was often inconsistent.  A disk it could not read one time

would be read flawlessly on another occasion.  In terms of 

compatibility with the VersaBraille, the two devices worked well 

together, except for the lockup problem I mentioned.  I 

experienced an occasional loss of a few characters during 

handshaking with the VersaBraille II; handshaking worked perfectly

with the Classic.  The inability to find out what subdirectories 

are on a disk could be a major inconvenience if the user does not 

have access to a computer.



     As always, Deane Blazie welcomes and acts upon user feedback.

The disk drive as it stands now is an excellent product.  I am 

confident it will get even better with each update.



                        *** Using the Braille 'n Speak with BEX

              by Phyllis Herrington, David Holladay, and Caryn Navy



     By cabling the Braille 'n Speak to an Apple II computer, you can transfer

data between the two devices. The Braille 'n Speak is able to transmit data to

the Apple via the Input Through Slot option of BEX. Likewise, the Print option

of BEX enables you to send a file to the Braille 'n Speak. The only software

needed is BEX.



     \\h3 Equipment Requirements



     An Apple IIe or Apple IIgs requires a Super Serial Card for Input through

Slot. If you have an Apple IIc or and Apple IIc Plus, you use the printer port.

You also need the proper cables for interfacing the Braille 'n Speak to the

Apple.



     \\h3 Cabling and Interface Cards



     To cable the Braille 'n Speak's IO cable to the Super Serial Card, you need

a universal null modem adapter (RDC 3F cable) between the IO cable and the SSC

connector. To connect to an Apple IIc, you need a 2F cable and a 3F cable. To

connect to an Apple IIc plus, you need a 11F and a 3F cable.

x

     Set the Super Serial Card to RDC's standard parameters (see the separate

section on Serial Interfaces).



     \\h3 Braille 'n Speak to Apple



     Configure BEX at the User or Master Level. Answer yes to the question Do

you have a remote device to input through slot? Give the slot number for the

Super Serial Card (or the Apple IIc or IIc+ port) that you will be connecting to

the Braille 'n Speak. Press N to answer no to the automatic set-up sequence

question. Answer no to the question Is this a Kurzweil Reading Machine?



     Include in your configuration a printer for output to the Braille 'n Speak.

Define a printer using the same slot as your remote serial device. How you

configure this printer determines the format of the Braille 'n Speak file once

it's downloaded. If you want every BEX character, including

commands, in your Braille 'n Speak file, configure this printer as a class P -

Paperless brailler. It works well to define this transfer printer as a Thiel

brailler; then BEX underlining commands do not interfere with your Braille 'n

Speak data. If you avoid BEX underlining in the material that you send out, a

Generic printer is fine. Use the carriage width and form length of your choice.

If you want to keep form feed characters out of your data, use form length zero.



     Use Input through Slot on BEX's Second Menu to get BEX to listen to the

Braille 'n Speak. See User Level Section 12 in the BEX manual for more

information about Input through Slot. Once you supply a target chapter name and

press <CR>, BEX prompts you to start the transfer.



     Make sure the Braille 'n Speak is set for 8 data bits, 2 stop bits, no

parity, 9600 baud, and hardware handshaking. To set the Braille 'n Speak to 2

stop bits, enter chord-P S 2. If hardware handshaking does not work, change to

software handshaking.




*** BRAILLE 'n SPEAK AND INK PRINTERS

One of the most attractive features of Braille 'n Speak is the fact that with it, one can print either in ink or braille depending on whether one is using an ink printer or braille embosser.  If one writes in grade two braille, both braille and ink printing can be done without writing the text a second time.  The following paragraphs will treat ink printing and suggest ways in which, by learning all you can about your printer, you can "squeeze all you can" from your B

raille 'n Speak and printer combination.

Before doing anything else about printing, it is vital that there be reliable communication between Braille 'n Speak and printer.  Blazie Engineering has cables which connect Braille 'n Speak to many of the printers in common use.  The cable which comes with your unit often can be used alone or in combination with the adapters provided in the interface kit.  Assuming you have the proper connection, consider the following points.  Do the "communication parameters" (o

perating conditions) in both devices match?  Are your printer and Braille 'n Speak set for the same baud rate, data length, stop bit values, parity, and is handshaking compatible?  If yours is a serial printer these considerations must be addressed, if not by you, then by someone you call upon for help.  How can you gain this needed information?  In the Braille 'n Speak manual you can learn how to set the various parameters just mentioned when to set them is necessary.  Your printer also has a manual.  Your

 printer manual contains similar information about your printer as well as other information you will need in order to push the capability of your printer to its limits.  Unfortunately, most printer manuals are not available in a readily accessible form.  Nevertheless, the effort expended in studying your printer manual will pay rich dividends if to produce good quality paper documents is your objective.

If the printer you want to use is a "parallel" printer, the cable and interface kit alone will not be e

nough.  In the case of a parallel printer, you will need the serial-to parallel cable available from Blazie engineering.

From within Braille 'n Speak you can set line and page length, left and top margin values.  You even can number pages.  If your printer is set for "pica" type, you will be able to print ten characters to the horizontal inch. Suppose you are using 8 - 1/2 by 11 inch paper.  If you want one inch left, right, top and bottom margins, you will want to set your Braille 'n Speak format paramete

rs like this:
LINE LENGTH 75
LEFT MARGIN TEN
PAGE LENGTH 60
Top MARGIN 6

With one inch left and right margins, we subtract two from 8 - 1/2 and obtain 6 - 1/2 inches of writing space per line.  Since we can fit ten characters to the inch, on a 6 - 1/2 inch segment of line we will be able to print 65 characters.  By setting a left margin of ten, we will have one inch for a left margin before printing begins. A line length of 75 means that no printing will take place beyond 75 spaces (7 - 1/2 inches) from th

e left edge of our page.  This assures us of a right margin of one inch even though there is no specific right margin command.  All this means that the printing which we do with the settings just given will take place between spaces ten and 75 on our line.

Top and bottom margins work in a similar way.  Since our sheet of paper is 11 inches in the vertical direction, and since it is possible to have 6 lines of print to the vertical inch, an eleven inch sheet of paper can contain as many as 66 lines of print

 top to bottom.  To have a one inch top margin, we should set a top margin value of 6.  This means that on each page we print, no printing will be allowed until 6 line feed characters have been sent to the printer.  In other words, the printer will be forced to move one inch down from its top of form position.  With a page length of 60, no printing will be allowed beyond line 60.  Line 60 is ten inches down from the top of the page, or one inch up from its bottom edge.  Our top margin, six, and our page len

gth, sixty, total 66, the maximum number of lines available per page.  When the Braille 'n Speak line counter reaches the value we have set in our format parameters, a form feed character is sent to the printer telling it to eject the current page and prepare to receive another sheet.

If your printer is set for "elite" type, you can print twelve characters to the horizontal inch instead of ten. In such a case, you might want a line length of 90 with a left margin of twelve.  Stop margin and page length wou

ld be 6 and 60 as before.

All this is fine if you are printing on full sheets of paper, but what if you want your Braille 'n Speak to print out some names and addresses on mailing labels; can you do this?  Yes, you can.  One of the most popular tractor feed mailing labels measures 3 - 1/2 inches long and 15/16 inches, just under and inch, high.  Think of such a label as a small page.  Using the information given for pica and elite type, you should be able to work out your own settings.  For pica, you might

 want a line length of 33 with a left margin of 2.  For three line addresses, a top margin of two and a page length of four should do.  If you need to allow for the occasional four line address, top margin one and page length five might be best.  For elite type, try a line length of 40 with a left margin of 3.

Another ctrl code available to computer driven printers is one which allows you to change the amount of movement in response to a line feed character.  Whereas normally six line feed characters will 

cause your paper to advance one inch in the vertical direction, by decreasing the amount of movement per line feed, it would be possible to have six line feeds move your paper only 3/4, 7/8, 8/9 etc. of an inch.  In the case of mailing labels, you might want to decrease ever so slightly  your printer's vertical movement per line in order to have better top and bottom margins.

Another application for such a command might be in the filling out of such forms as bank checks.  If the print doesn't fall precisel

y where it should, slight adjustment of printer movement may correct this condition.  To be able to do this requires study of your printer manual and careful use of your calculator.

Some printers can be fine tuned by incremental values measured in seventy-seconds of an inch and others by amounts as little as 1/144 of and inch.  If a printer responds to line feeds in seventy-seconds of an inch,  six lines to the vertical inch means that each time the printer receives a line feed character, it moves the pape

r up 12/72 of an inch.  From this you can see that to adjust printer movement is possible, but not without some careful arithmetic.  Always experiment when you try something of this sort.

You should know your printer and the control codes it recognizes in order to be able to do things which are not possible with the Braille 'n Speak alone.  For example, the Braille 'n Speak has no specific command which will let you underline text in print.  Yet, through the use of the appropriate control sequence, your Br

aille 'n Speak and printer combination can produce underlined text.  With the appropriate control codes and adjustment of line length to accomodate larger letters, using the Braille 'n Speak with an ImageWriter II, I have been able to generate large print characters which most people with impaired vision can read comfortably.

How do these control codes work and how do we use them?  Think of control codes as switches.  They really are commands which the printer recognizes as if they were established by thro

wing switches to put the printer into a given mode - type size change, margin setting, spacing between lines, print quality, underlining almost anything you might want in the way of printer control.  Once set, these "switches" remain set either for as long as the power is turned on in your printer or until you unset them with another command.  For a practical example, consider underlining using the ImageWriter I.  There are two control code commands associated with underlining.  One begins the underlining p

rocess and the other ends it.  There is an old quotation that goes, "Today is the first day of the rest of your life."  Suppose we want to write this quotation with the words "first", "rest" and "life" underlined.  The BEGIN UNDERLINE command is escape X.  That is an uppercase X.  Underlining is terminated with an escape Y.  Again, it is an uppercase Y.  The "escape" character is a ctrl left brace.   The left brace character is dots 2-4-6.  To make it a ctrl character we first must enter x-chord.  So, escap

e (esc) is x-chord dots 2-4-6.  When writing ctrl codes, we do not space between the elements of the sequence.  There is no space between the esc character and the X or Y of our command.  To write our quotation, we would write, "Today is the x-chord dots 2-4-6 X first x-chord 2-4-6 Y day of the x-chord 2-4-6 X rest x-chord 2-4-6 Y of your x-chord 2-4-6 X life. x-chord 2-4-6 Y"  All this means that the three underlined words are bracketed by esc X and esc Y characters.  The spaces before and after them were 

not underlined, but could have been depending on the placement of the esc sequences.

If you write in grade two braille, in order to write your uppercase X, you must first write your x-chord and then enter a dot 4 followed by a u-chord and the letter x.  Dot 4 tells the Braille 'n Speak translator not to translate your "x" as the word "it" and u-chord places the x in uppercase.

Some ctrl codes do not begin with the escape (esc) character.  They may beggin with a ctrl letter followed by either a number or a

 punctuation.  If a ctrl character is a letter, it makes no difference whether you write the letter in upper or lower case.  When an esc character is followed by a letter it is vital that you know whether that letter is in upper or lower case and that you write it appropriately when issuing the command.  These ctrl sequences are not printed in your document.  They are obeyed by the printer, but not printed.

Earlier, we said that ctrl codes stay in effect until they are changed by you, the operator of the p

rinter, or you turn off the power to the printer.  There will be times when you switch from one activity to another or from one document to another.  If you place in document one those codes needed to produce large print characters, you should place disabling commands at the end of your document.  If you do not do this, you might turn off the power to your printer.  Otherwise, if you switch from document one to document two, you may be surprised to find document two printed in large characters.

When settin

g up printing conditions, if things are not as you want them, it always is a good practice to turn your printer off and wait a few seconds before making your changes and printing again.  An unwanted character may remain in your printer's buffer, (stuck in its throat as it were).  Turning the printer off will clear this condition.

CENTERING TEXT

At present, there is no Braille 'n Speak command which automatically will center text.  However, if you are willing to put forth the effort, you can center lines o

f text.  This is how to do it.

If text is to be printed either in ink or braille, its centering is format dependent.  That is, where you place your text depends on the length of your printed line.  Suppose we want to center the following line which is written entirely in uppercase:

YOU CAN DO MORE WITH the RIGHT KIND OF KNOWLEDGE
If we want to print this line in ink, we count the characters to be printed.  In ink print, capitalization adds no characters to the text.  Our sample line contains 48 characters

.  If we have a line length of 75 and a left margin of ten, we plan for 65 printed characters per line.  Our sample line contains 48 characters so we subtract this 48 from 65.  This leaves us with 17.  Add one to 17 to make it an even number.  Now divide the resulting 18 by 2.  The result is 9.  To have this line printed as a centered line in the body of your text, enter a carriage return, space 9 times, write the line and enter another carriage return.

Although there are 48 characters in the print version

 of this line, if we wrote it in grade two braille, we only entered 39 characters.  However, when Braille 'n Speak's braille to print translator finished with it, it produced the needed 48 characters.

On the Other hand, if we want this text centered and produced in braille, we will have to count the double capitals placed at the beginning of each word.  A 39 space is difficult to recognize as being a centered line.  However, if we break it we can have two centered lines.  Line one might read:  YOU CAN DO M

ORE
and line two would contain: WITH the RIGHT KIND OF KNOWLEDGE
Line one contains 15 braille characters.  Line two holds 23 characters.  Wait, if the original line contained 39 braille characters, where is the missing character?  15 plus 23 totals 38.  In our original line, there was a space between MORE and WITH.  When we broke the line at this point, we dropped the space when we went to the second line.  If our Braille 'n Speak format was set to provide a braille line length of 42, to center line one we 

subtract its 15 characters from 42 and obtain 27, plus one, or 28.  Divide this by 2 and the result is 14.  You need to space 14 times after your carriage return before writing line one.

To center line 2, subtract 23 from 42 and divide the result by 2 as before.  In this case, the result (after adding the needed one) is 20.  So, space ten times before writing line two.

This is one instance where although you do not have to rewrite the text, the process is not automatic.

POSSIBLE PROBLEMS AND SUGGESTED SO

LUTIONS

When the TRANSMIT command is sent to the printer nothing happens!  First check ALL CABLES!  If the printer is powered by house current, is it plugged into a source of power?  Are all cables which connect Braille 'n Speak and printer firmly attached?  Is the printer turned on?  No, we don't think you are stupid, we've done these things ourselves - and not all that long ago either!  If yours is a serial printer, does handshaking match?

The printer prints, but the paper does not move up for a new lin

e.  All printing takes place on the top line.  Though appearing disasterous, this is fixed easily.  What is happening here probably is that your printer expects to receive not only a carriage return character but a line feed character as well.  The carriage return tells the printing element to go to the start of the next line, the left side of the page.  The line feed character tells the printer to move the paper up to allow for a new line.  Some printers can be set to furnish their own line feed characters

 if none come from the device which drives them.  Usually, this is done by means of "DIP" switches inside the printer case.  If this is not possible, you can tell Braille 'n Speak to "APPEND LINE FEED" by entering the letters a and y from within the status menu or by entering P-chord a y from within your file.

Printing takes place, but the printing runs the full width of the page, words are broken, and it looks like a mess!

Most likely you have not set format parameters.  Check to be sure that you have se

t a left margin and a line length within the capability of the printer and its type setting - pica or elite.

The printer prints "garbage"!  Usually what is meant by such a comment is that a jumble of letters, numbers and punctuations is printed which looks more like a spy code than the file you intended to print.

Most likely, one or more of the communications parameters is mismatched.  In the case of "pure garbage" baud rate data length or parity may be the culprit.  If bits of text are printed but with g

aps, you might check to be sure that the stop bit values are the same in both devices.

Not all the document is printed.  Parts are missing and margins go out of adjustment after a time.

Again, it would seem we have a handshaking problem.  To gain a working idea of handshaking, think of one person trying to feed another.  Person a places food in the mouth of person b.  If b is allowed time to chew and swallow before a presents another bite, all goes well.  If a keeps poking food at b faster than b can hand

le it, either b chokes or wears much of the food on the front of his or her clothing.  In the case of printing, the Braille 'n Speak "feeds" data to the printer.  Braille 'n Speak can feed faster than the printer can swallow, that is to say print what it is given.  Handshaking is the process by which the two devices communicate so that the printer can tell Braille 'n Speak to suspend sending temporarily until more data can be handled.

The printer keeps printing without regard to the perforation between she

ets.

In the case of tractor feed printers, usually there is a "skip perf" option which must be enabled.  Again, this can be done by means of a DIP switch in some cases.  In others, there is a ctrl code which can enable or disable this feature.  This is why study of your printer manual is important.

Though not an exhaustive list of all possibilities, the conditions just cited cover most of the problems people encounter when using computer devices in conjunction with printers.

THE ACT OF PRINTING

Having s

et all parameters, established our desired format and done all the things we need to do to prepare for printing, how do we begin the act of printing?  Braille 'n Speak has no specific "PRINT" command.  However, it does have a "TRANSMIT" command.  To print in ink, T-chord followed by the letter A will take us to the top of our file, turn on the serial port (in case we forgot to do that) and recognize the status of our braille to print translator and format values.  If we want to produce braille, T-chord foll

owed by the letter B will take us to the top of our file, turn off the braille to print translator, turn on the serial port and respect the format values we have set.

* * * * * * * * * *

The number of elementary and high school students who use Braille 'n Speak is growing.  Since the Apple II family of computers is used extensively in these settings, it follows that the Apple ImageWriter II also enjoys considerable popularity.  Here is a table of ctrl codes recognized by this printer.  Blazie Engineering 

offers a cable which will connect the Braille 'n Speak and the ImageWriter II.  The communication cable which comes with your Braille 'n Speak can be used to connect the Braille 'n Speak and the original ImageWriter I.

* * * * * * * * * *

Table of ImageWriter II Codes

Quality of Printing

draft ESC a 0
correspondence ESC a 1
near letter quality ESC a 2

Colors

black ESC K 0
yellow ESC K 1
red ESC K 2
blue ESC K 3
orange ESC K 4
green ESC K 5
purple ESC K 6

superscript ESC x
end superscript ESC z
begin 

subscript ESC y
end subscript ESC z
half height ESC w
end half height ESC W
slashed zeros ESC D CTRL-@ CTRL-A
end slashed zeros ESC Z CTRL-@ CTRL-A
begin underline ESC X
end underline ESC Y
begin boldface ESC !
end boldface ESC "
headline CTRL-N
end headline CTRL-O
pitch 9 cpi (extended) ESC n
10 cpi (pica) ESC N
12 cpi (elite) ESC E
pica proportional ESC p
elete proportional ESC P
semi-condensed (13 cpi) ESC e
15 cpi ESC q
17 cpi ultra condensed ESC Q
proportional spacing between chars ESC n (1-6) 
set spa

cing to n dots ESC s n where n is 0 to 9

Character Sets
standard ESC $
mouse text ESC &

international languages
American ESC Z CTRL-G CTRL-@
British ESC Z CTRL-D CTRL-@ ESC D CTRL-C CTRL-@
German ESC Z CTRL-C CTRL-@ ESC D CTRL-D CTRL-@
France ESC Z CTRL-A CTRL-@ ESC D CTRL-F CTRL-@

set top of form ESC v
left margin ESC L nnn (where n = 0 - 255)
disable per skip ESC D CTRL-@ CTRL-D
enable perf skip ESC Z CTRL-@ CTRL-D
lines per inch 6 ESC A
8 ESC B
specify distance ESC P nn
formlength ESC H nnnn (incremen

ts nnnn/144)
end of line cr only ESC Z @ CTRL-@
cr/lf ESC D @ CTRL-@

linefeeds
no cr before lf ESC l 1
add cr before lf ESC l 0
add auto linefeed after cr 27,68,128,0
no linefeed after cr 27,90,128,0
forward linefeed ESC f
reverse ESC r
feed n lines CTRL-_ n (1-9)

select downloaded chars ESC ' (normal ascii downloaded chars)
high ESC *
select rom chars ESC $
16 max column width chars ESC +
8 col width chars ESC -
begin download ESC I
end download CTRL-D
paper detect off ESC O
on ESC o
software reset ESC c


check printer config ESC ?
ignore 8 bit ESC D CTRL-@ _ (space is _)
recognize ESC Z CTRL-@ space


buffer control
cancel unprinted text CTRL-X
no linefeed at buffer ESC Z space CTRL-@
linefeed added at buffer ESC D space CTRL-@

print head left to right only ESC >
bi-directional ESC <
backspace and print CTRL-H c
move head to next tab CTRL-I

* * * * * * * * * *

*** THE TWIDDLEDUMP

One of the most useful devices you will find among the various devices in your interface kit is something like a gender chan

ger except that it has a male plug on one end and a female jack on the other.  What's more, there is a tiny hole in one of its faces.  The hole is just a bit larger than that which a braille stylus would make.  This device bears the improbable name "twiddledump".  What can you do with a twiddledump anyway?

The twiddledump is a monitor.  As its plug and jack suggest, it is intended to be connected to something else.  It can be inserted in a communication line  through which serial data flows.  Then, when an

d if theline becomes active, it "twiddles" as data are being "dumped".

When you are using a modem and are in communication with a bulletin board, your modem may not have a loudspeaker.  In such a case, you will not be able to monitor the flow of data.  When data flows even at 300 baud, speech which can be understood cannot keep up with it.  This means that the BBS with which you are in contact may have sent you a prompt some time ago.  Your Braille 'n Speak or talking computer may slowly be speaking its wa

y to the end of the data stream.  With a twiddledump, you will be able to tell the instant the device with which you are in contact has stopped sending.  If you know the routine of that BBS, you can respond to the anticipated prompt.  If you are operating in "unfamiliar teritory", you are able to jump to the end of the file and read the last line, usually a prompt.

If both of the communicating devices are physically present, two Braille 'n Speaks, a computer and a Braille 'n Speak, etc. both in the same ro

om, the twiddledump can be most useful in spotting handshaking problems.  For example, if you are sending files from one Braille 'n Speak to another and you hear no twiddling sound when you issue your transmit command, you know that no transmission is taking place.  In other words, "no twiddle, no dump"!  On the other hand, if the receiving braille 'n Speak is in "interactive" mode and the twiddledump sounds but no speech comes from the receiver, you know that no reception is taking place even though the se

nder is sending.

The twiddledump does nothing but monitor what is going on.  It does not "roll" data lines.  That is, it does not perform the send/receive crossover function of a null modem.  It simply reports by the sound it emits whether or not there is activity on a serial communication link.  Once you develop the habit of using a twiddledump, chances are you'll wonder how you ever managed without one.

Fred Gissoni                       *** Using the Braille 'n Speak with BEX

              by Phyllis Herrington, David Holladay, and Caryn Navy



     By cabling the Braille 'n Speak to an Apple II computer, you can transfer

data between the two devices. The Braille 'n Speak is able to transmit data to

the Apple via the Input Through Slot option of BEX. Likewise, the Print option

of BEX enables you to send a file to the Braille 'n Speak. The only software

needed is BEX.



     \\h3 Equipment Requirements



     An Apple IIe or Apple IIgs requires a Super Serial Card for Input through

Slot. If you have an Apple IIc or and Apple IIc Plus, you use the printer port.

You also need the proper cables for interfacing the Braille 'n Speak to the

Apple.



     \\h3 Cabling and Interface Cards



     To cable the Braille 'n Speak's IO cable to the Super Serial Card, you need

a universal null modem adapter (RDC 3F cable) between the IO cable and the SSC

connector. To connect to an Apple IIc, you need a 2F cable and a 3F cable. To

connect to an Apple IIc plus, you need a 11F and a 3F cable.

x

     Set the Super Serial Card to RDC's standard parameters (see the separate

section on Serial Interfaces).



     \\h3 Braille 'n Speak to Apple



     Configure BEX at the User or Master Level. Answer yes to the question Do

you have a remote device to input through slot? Give the slot number for the

Super Serial Card (or the Apple IIc or IIc+ port) that you will be connecting to

the Braille 'n Speak. Press N to answer no to the automatic set-up sequence

question. Answer no to the question Is this a Kurzweil Reading Machine?



     Include in your configuration a printer for output to the Braille 'n Speak.

Define a printer using the same slot as your remote serial device. How you

configure this printer determines the format of the Braille 'n Speak file once

it's downloaded. If you want every BEX character, including

commands, in your Braille 'n Speak file, configure this printer as a class P -

Paperless brailler. It works well to define this transfer printer as a Thiel

brailler; then BEX underlining commands do not interfere with your Braille 'n

Speak data. If you avoid BEX underlining in the material that you send out, a

Generic printer is fine. Use the carriage width and form length of your choice.

If you want to keep form feed characters out of your data, use form length zero.



     Use Input through Slot on BEX's Second Menu to get BEX to listen to the

Braille 'n Speak. See User Level Section 12 in the BEX manual for more

information about Input through Slot. Once you supply a target chapter name and

press <CR>, BEX prompts you to start the transfer.



     Make sure the Braille 'n Speak is set for 8 data bits, 2 stop bits, no

parity, 9600 baud, and hardware handshaking. To set the Braille 'n Speak to 2

stop bits, enter chord-P S 2. If hardware handshaking does not work, change to

software handshaking.



               *** Braille 'n Speak and Kurzweil Personal Reader

               Robert Carter, Ph.d.



                          Introduction



     By complying with the following instructions, you can transmit

all or part of the text that is read by the Kurzweil Personal

Reader directly to a Braille 'n Speak file.  This is particularly

useful to anyone who is using the KPR in a library or other public

setting because you can take a Braille 'n Speak copy of whatever

the KPR was reading upon leaving the library.  This text can, of

course, be edited or manipulated on the Braille 'n Speak in the

same ways that any Braille 'n Speak file can be worked with.  These

instructions are relevant only to the stand-alone Kurzweil Personal

Reader.  They do not apply to the PC-based KPR.



                       What You Will Need



     In addition to the BNS and KPR hardware, you will need the

Braille 'n Speak's interface cable and a universal null modem

adapter.  This adapter can either be purchased from Blazie

Engineering as part of their interface kit or as a single item.  It

can be found at many computer stores as well.  The serial ports on

the BNS and KPR are configured as Data Communications Equipment

(DCE) and without a universal null modem adapter they cannot

communicate with each other.



                     Step By Step Procedure



1. With the power turned off on all equipment, plug the small end

     of the BNS interface cable into the Braille 'n Speak's serial

     port.  This port is located on the left side of the BNS just

     in front of the round battery charger connector.  Plug the

     other end of the cable into the female side of the universal

     null modem adapter.  Plug the adapter and cable into the

     serial port on the back of the Kurzweil Personal Reader's

     Electronics Unit.  Note that this is a vertical female serial

     port located on the left side of the back of the Electronics

     Unit.  Do not get confused and try to plug the cable into the

     Automatic Scanner.



2. Power on the KPR's Electronics Unit.  When the system says "hand

     scanner input," locate the "keypad selection" key on the KPR's

     keyboard.  This will be the left most key on the second row

     from the bottom.  Press this key three times or until the KPR

     says "communications setup keypad."



3. Locate the "message" key. It is the second key from the left on

     the bottom row.  Hold this key down and listen to the KPR

     speak its current communications settings.  If it is set to

     the factory default settings, you will hear: "communications

     setup keypad; block serial output mode; speed is set at 9600

     baud; data word length is 8 bits; 1 stop bit; no parity;

     xon/xoff handshaking; end of line reported as carriage return

     line feed; end of paragraph not reported; end of column not

     reported; end of page reported as form feed."  Remember that

     it is necessary to press and hold down the message key to get

     all of this information.  For this interface to work, it is

     critical that baud rate, data bits, stop bits, parity, and

     handshaking are set to these default settings.  It is possible

     to use the keypad to change any of these settings

     individually.  An easier alternative is to reset the KPR back

     to its factory default settings.  To do this, locate the "save

     and restore settings" key.  It is the left most key on the

     third row from the bottom.  You can either press this key

     several times until the kpr says "restore factory

     communications settings.  Press the top left key on the keypad

     to confirm."  Or, you can hold down the large "backward shift"

     key (the bottom right key on the keyboard) and press the "save

     and restore settings" key once.  In either event, follow the

     KPR's instructions to confirm the restoration of factory

     settings by pressing the top left key on the keyboard. 

     Assuming that the Braille 'n Speak is set to the factory

     default settings, the interface will now work properly.  There

     are two changes that you may optionally wish to make to this

     setup.  By default, the KPR sends a carriage return linefeed

     pair at the end of each line.  You may wish to have it send

     only a carriage return since the BNS does not require a

     linefeed.  This can be changed by using the "line end markup"

     key, which is the top left key on the keypad.  Press this key

     until the kpr says "end of lines reported as carriage

     returns."  Finally, by default, the KPR is set to send user

     defined blocks of text out the serial port.  If you simply

     want everything to be sent as it is being read, change this

     default by using the "transmission mode" key.  This is the

     right most key on the third row from the bottom of the KPR's

     keyboard.  Press this key until the KPR says "continuous

     serial output mode."  Again, change this last setting only if

     you do not want to use the block transmission mode.



     Now you are ready to return to the KPR's reading keypad. 

     Locate the "keypad selection" key.  It is the left most key on

     the second row from the bottom.  Press it until the KPR says

     "reading keypad."



4. Power on the Braille 'n Speak and make certain that it is set to

     the factory default communications settings.  Do this by

     entering the status menu with chord-st; that is, dots 3 and 4

     along with the spacebar.  Use chord-a and chord-dot 4 to make

     sure that baud rate is set to 9600, data bits is set to 8,

     stop bits is set to 1, parity is set to no, and handshake is

     set to software.  Remember that in the status menu, numbers

     are entered in the lower part of the cell without a number

     sign.  Before exiting the status menu, locate the "serial port

     active" option and turn on the serial port with a letter "y." 

     Next enter a chord-e to exit the status menu.  Finally, open

     a new BNS file that will contain the text that is sent from

     the KPR.  Remember to make this file big enough to accommodate

     your text.  You can, of course, make the file bigger if

     necessary.  Answer no to the question about the grade two

     translator.  You will be working in computer braille with this

     interface.



5. The next step is to begin reading with the KPR.  If you are

     using the hand scanner, simply proceed.  If you are using the

     automatic scanner, you will need to select it.  Locate the

     "input device selection" key.  It is the second key from the

     left on the second row from the bottom.  Press this key until

     the KPR says "automatic scanner input." Keep pressing the key

     until you have the appropriate scanning mode for your document

     selected.  That is, either select "left side up," "right side

     up," or "autoflip" depending on your document.  Place your

     document on the scanner and press the scanner's "start" button

     to begin reading.



6. If you selected "continuous serial output mode" with the

     "transmission mode" key, as the KPR reads, data will be

     automatically transmitted to the BNS.  Note that only text and

     not messages from the KPR will be sent out the serial port.



     If you left the "transmission mode" key set to "block serial

     output mode", nothing will be transmitted as reading takes

     place.  In this mode, it is necessary to use the KPR's

     "reading keypad" to block whatever portion of the text you

     wish to transfer to the BNS.  A detailed discussion of how to

     use the keypad is beyond the scope of this document.  See the

     KPR manual for complete details.  In brief, however, you will

     need to use the keypad to locate the beginning of the text to

     be transmitted.  Once this is done, press the "text marking"

     key. It is the second key from the left on the third row from

     the bottom.  Press this key until the KPR says "set mark." 

     The KPR is now waiting for you to tell it which mark to set. 

     You can use any of the eight keys on the top two rows of the

     keyboard.  The top left key is considered mark 1 and the right

     most key on the second row is considered mark 8.  Remember

     which mark you set at this time.  Next, move the KPR speech

     cursor to the end of the block of text that you wish to

     transmit.  Go back to the "text marking" key and press it

     until you hear "transmit from mark."  The KPR is now waiting

     for you to press whichever key you used when setting the mark. 

     The KPR will transmit the text and will tell you when it is

     finished.  You can now mark other sections of text and

     transmit them to the BNS in the same way.  When all desired

     text has been stored on the BNS, remember to deactivate the

     Braille 'n Speak's serial port.



     As mentioned earlier, even though this file was not created

     using the bns keyboard, it is now identical to any other bns

     file.  This means that it can be edited, printed, and saved on

     disk just like all other Braille 'n Speak files.      
*** NATIONAL FEDERATION OF THE BLIND

      Research & Development Committee

      4424 Brookhaven Avenue

      Louisville, KY  40220



                          May 18, 1992



Deane Blazie

Blazie Engineering

Forest Hill, MD

FAX: 1-410-8365040



Subject:  SENDING FAX FROM A BNS



Dear Deane:



I thought it might be a useful exercise to create a text file using

my word processor which could be saved on a disk for later

transmission as a FAX.  Now that Compuserve offers "free"

electronic mail as a part of their basic services, we can expect

rapid growth in the use of this service.  Compuserve now boasts

approximately one million subscribers plus uncounted millions of

other E-mail users who may be reached through gate way connections

to other services.  All this is quite interesting to BNS users most

of whom already know about E-mail, even if they haven't chosen to

use it.



This note is to pass along some details describing how the

CompuServe mail can be helpful in communicating with many companies

and individuals who may or may not have a CompuServe membership.



Begin by composing your message on the BNS or download the text

into the BNS from your computer or a disk.  It's a good idea to

create a separate BNS file to contain the message.



Review all of the settings in the BNS Status menu to make sure that

your communications parameters are correct.  Also, set your left

margin for 10, number of lines per page should be 55 and the line

length should be 65.  Top and bottom margins should be set to 0 and

page numbering should be turned off.  (CompuServe automatically

numbers the pages when it sends your FAX.)



Check to be sure that the Braille translator is turned on or off

whichever is appropriate.You should also set the BNS to append

linefeeds if they were not included when the message was prepared.



Open a file, like the Clip Board, for use whiling dialing and

interacting with CompuServe.  Dial up CompuServe and log on with

your ID and password.  Type "GO MAIL" and select menu item 3, which

is  to upload a file.  From the next menu, select item 4 which

tells CompuServe that you want to send the file without using an

error-checking protocol.  When you get the message to start your

upload, open the BNS file containing your FAX message and transmit

the file.



When the BNS says "OK" you may want to return to the Clipboard file

to finish the operation.  In any case, you will need to send /ex

from the BNS keyboard to signal the end of the upload.



Select item 1 from the next menu which  indicates  that you want

the uploaded message to be sent.  You will be asked for the name or

ID of the person to receive the message.  Here is where you get to

indicate that the message is to be sent as a FAX instead of regular

E-mail.  Answer the prompt by keying in the name of the addressee

followed by a space, the greater than symbol followed by FAX: a

space and the complete phone number of the FAX machine to receive

the message.  Here is an example :



(Name or ID)

Deane Blazie >FAX: 1 410 836-5040



The phone number of the FAX machine must include the initial 1 and

may include country code and city code for foreign phone numbers.



The rest of the process is straight forward and self explanatory. 

You'll be asked for your name and the subject of your message which

will be used to create and automatically send a cover sheet for

your FAX.  



The cost of a FAX in North America is 75 cents for the first 1000

characters and 25 cents for each additional 1000 characters.  For

information on charges for sending FAXES to other countries,

request help after you GO MAIL.





NOTE:

CompuServe echoes back to your BNS each line as it is sent.  If

this  is not wanted, turn     the "echo" off before starting your 

           session by using these commands:



!PRO <return>

!FULLD <return>



Restore "echo" with

!PRO <return>

!HALFD <return>



                 *** PACKET RADIO AND BRAILLE 'N SPEAK

by Joe Giovanelli



     The Braille 'n Speak works well in conjunction with

telephone modems, either for chatting or for use with BBS's.  Tis

is covered elsewhere in this book.



     Amateur radio operators use radio links rather than

telephone lines.  One aspect of amateur radio is what is known as

"packet radio."  There are great similarities between this and

telephone modem communications.  Using packet radio, one can chat

between parties or store and/or retrieve messages on what we call

PBBS's (packet bulletin board systems).



     Unlike telephone modem communications, packet communications

always makes use of error-checking protocols.  This means that

the transmitting equipment and the receiving equipment are

interrogating each other to make sure that all data is flowing

smoothly and without errors.  Most of this communication is done

at 1200 baud.  The error-checking proceedures slow the actual

communication speed down.



     When Braille 'n speak is used to communicate via telephone,

the unit is not directly connected to the phone line.  A device

known as a "modem" is connected between the Braille 'n Speak and

the line.  Similarly, when communicating via packet radio (or

packet as we usually call it)

the radio transmitting/receiving device.  Rather, what is called

a "terminal node controller" is connected between the Braille 'n

Speak and the radio aparatus--which is usually a combined

transmitter and receiver (transceiver).

Just as is true of modems, we also must place a "nul

modem" adapter between the Braille 'n Speak and the terminal node

controller (TNC).



     Many readers may need little more instruction than what I'v

just given.  Even so, it's best to go over some basics.



     Perhaps the most popular TNC is the PK-232, produced by

Advanced Electronic Applications.  While it is likely that TNC's

made by other firms will behave in more or less the same way as

the PK-232, my experience is limited to this unit.



     Before you can attempt doing anything with your TNC and

Braille 'n Speak (BNS), you must know something about the TNC you

have.  In any case, you must know that for your equipment to work

properly, you must tell it your amateur radio call letters.  You

must tell it whether or not you want key strokes echoed back to

you.  (You probably won't want this.  You must also tell the TNC

what baud rate to expect to receive from the BNS.  In the case of

the PK-232 at any rate, it is simplest to set your BNS to 1200

baud, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit, no parity, software handshake.

Isn't it nice that just about all these settings are BNS

defaults?



     You should read the appropriate instructions for your TNC.

Once you have studied out any specifics for your unit, you're

ready for some final setups.



     You know that data coming from the outside world into BNS

will have to be stored somewhere.  You must, therefore, create a

file of suitable size.  I find that a file of four pages is

sufficient for anything I do.  If you want to download lots of

text, maybe you'll need more, but I really do not think you

should make your file size smaller than this.



     Program files can be very long indeed.  The BNS, however,

does not provide for the protocols necessary to download such

files; this is why you can usually have just a few pages for text

storage.



I call my "capture file" simply PACKET but any name you can

remember is fine.

     You must turn off the translator because you will

be typing in Grade 1, using dropped-cell numbers and no number

sign.



     Make sure all connections are correct between the TNC and

your transceiver.  Make sure to use the nul modem adapter between

the BNS and the RS-232 input on your TNC.  Turn "interactive" on

with the G Chord.  Activate the serial port with P chord, dots

2-6; then answer "Y" to the prompt.



     Turn on the TNC.  If all is well, you'll hear the greeting

screen for your device.  Press "enter" (dots 4-6 chord) a couple

of times.  Be sure that the TNC prompts you for a command "CMD".

when you hear that prompt, you're ready to go on packet.  You

will want to type "OPMODE" and press enter.  This command asks

your TNC to tell you what operating mode the unit is in.  If it

is already in packet, the TNC  will tell you so.  If it is in

some other mode, such as Morse, it will let you know.  Instruct

the TNC to operate in packet by typing "PA" and press "ENTER."

You should get a reply such as "OPMODE was in MORSE.  Now is

PACKET.



     Much of the rest of what you do is pretty much a matter of

your needs.  You'll most likely want to get onto your local PBBS,

or, as we say, connect to it.  You'll do this by typing "C",

space, and the call letters or alias of your BBS:

C WA4TFZ (press "enter".

C CHO (press "enter").

     The first instance is the way in which you would connect to

your BBS by typing in the call letters.  Naturally your PBBS call

letters won't be WA4TFZ--the call sign for my PBBS.

     The second line I showed is a way to connect to a PBBS by

using an "alias", or nickname.  "CHO" is the alias for my board.

Yours will be different, or there might not even be one.



     Most everything else we can talk about involves the

specifics of the particular PPBS you're using.  I won't,

therefore, tell you how to sign off, how to list your mail, read

your mail, list the last 20 messages entered into the system,

etc.  I need to touch on one final point, and I'll illustrate it

by showing how you would address a message to me:





SP W2PVY @ WA4TFZ.VA.US.NOAM (press ENTER)



     My only point here is that the "at" is the "at sign" rather

than typing the word "at".  To type that sign on the BNS, type "u

chord dot 4.  In other words the "at sign" is an upper case dot

4.



     You'll be writing lots of Grade 1 text, so be careful not to

lapse into Grade 2.  Don't write colon as dots 2-5.  The colon is

the "wh sign".



     The main signs you'll need are the period (dots 4-6), the

comma (dot 6), the question mark (dots 1-4-5-6, quote (dot 5),

the apostrophe (dot 3), exclamation (dots 2-3-4-6).  The BNS

instruction manual lists the various Braille equivalents for

common ASCII (print) characters.  I urge you to become familiar

with most of these.  Even so, what I have given you will get you

by quite well.



     Most TNC's are capable of operating on modes other than

packet.  Morse will be fine; I think, but don't know, that AMTOR

will work as it is supposed to.  Neither RTTY nor BAUDOT will

work when using BNS as the computer.  The reason for this is a

bit complicated.  Packet, and AMTOR are under the control

of the TNC in terms of the way the system switches between

receiving and transmitting.  In most instances in the Morse mode,

the TNC sends the elements which make up the morse characters.

In the absence of a character, the transceiver automatically

switches from transmit to receive.  Where your transceiver does

not do this (because it does not feature QSK), you still may use

the Morse mode because you can manually switch between transmit

and receive.



     Both RTTY and BAUDOT rely on the computer to switch between

the transmit and the receive modes.  In this case the computer is

the BNS.  Because of the nature of the RS-232 voltages on the

BNs (specifically, the request-to-send, RTS, line),

the push-to-talk line will be held in transmit all the time.

 Thus, you can transmit, but, short of disconnecting the

push-to-talk line manually, there's no way to go to receive when

necessary.  You could wire up a special BNS RS-232 cable with a

switch in the push-to-talk line.  I have not tried this, but it

is a reasonable possibility as I see it.  It also looks as though

you could toggle between Vox and Manual push-to-talk, thereby

providing a means of opening that line when you wish to receive.

Preliminary experiments here at W2PVY tend to show that this is a

real possibility, however.



     That does it for me.  I sincerely hope that this paper

will help you discover yet another dimension to the many others

you've doubtless found for your Braille 'n Speak.
         *** TRANSFERRING FILES BETWEEN THE READING EDGE
                    AND BRAILLE 'N SPEAK
                              
                       BY STEVE BOOTH
                              

Use the following steps to connect The Reading Edge and BNS:

1.  Use the cable that came with BNS.  You will need a null
modem adapter attached to the 25-pin male end of the cable.
The Reading Edge and the BNS are DCE devices.

2.  Connect the cable to the seria

l port on the back of the
The Reading Edge.  Then, connect the other end to the BNS
serial port.

3.  Match the communications parameters.  The default
parameters on both devices will work.  If you have changed
any communications parameters, check the status menu on BNS
and the communications keypad on the The Reading Edge.
Ensure that the baud rate, parity, stop bits, and handshake
protocols are the same on both devices.  Handshake is
xon/xoff on The Reading Edge and software handshake on the
BNS.

Use the

 following steps to send a block of text from The
Reading Edge to BNS:

1.  On the BNS, open the file to receive text.  Ensure that
you have enough room in the file to store the block of text
you plan to receive.  Turn on the serial port.

2.  On The Reading Edge, move to the beginning of the text
block you want to send.  Then, press the Mark Text key twice
until The Reading Edge says "set mark."

3.  Select one of the top eight keys on The Reading Edge as
your mark.  For example, press the top left key.  T

he
Reading Edge says "mark one has been set."

4.  Use The Reading Edge's movement keys or the Read key to
move to the end of the block of text you want to send.

5.  Press the Mark text key five times until The Reading
Edge says "send the text between the mark and the cursor."

6.  Confirm that you want to send the text by selecting the
mark that you set earlier.  For example, if you used the top
left key to set the mark, use that key to transmit the text
block.

Use the following steps to send text as you

 scan on The
Reading Edge:

1.  Turn on the Braille 'n Speak serial port.

2.  On The Reading Edge communications keypad, press the
Serial Output key until The Reading Edge says "send text."

3.  Press the Scan key to start scanning text. The Reading
Edge sends text through the serial port as it recognizes the
text.  The Braille 'N Speak will receive text as long as
there is enough room in the file and the serial port is
active.

Use the following steps to send files from Braille 'N Speak
to The Reading Edg

e:

1.  On The Reading Edge reading keypad, press the Select
Input key until The Reading Edge says "receive text."
Ensure that there is enough free space in The Reading Edge's
memory to receive the file from the BNS.  Use the status key
to find out how much space is available.  Approximately 120
kilobytes are available when the text memory is empty.

2.  Turn on the BNS serial port.

3.  On BNS, open the file to send to The Reading Edge.

4.  Next, use the BNS's Chord T transit function followed by
the para

meter for the text you want to send.  The BNS says
"ok": when the process is complete.

Please note that because The Reading Edge reads ASCII text
files, the BNS's braille translator should be "on" when you
send files to The Reading Edge.

Because The Reading Edge sends ASCII text files, turn the
BNS's braille translator "off" when receiving files from The
Reading Edge.



You can experiment with other parameters on each machine to
obtain the best results for your particular situation.



Using the Braille 'n Speak 
with the Braille Blazer


by David Goldfield

  



If you have a Braille Blazer embosser from Blazie Engineering, you can easily interface this printer with your Braille 'n Speak and print out your documents with no problems.
  The Blazer has two ports, a serial and a parallel port. Since Braille 'n Speak is a serial device, you can connect it to the serial port on the Blazer. 
  The serial port can be found on the back of the printer. I am assuming that the printer is positioned with the three buttons on your right. If this is so, feel along the back of th

e printer, starting at the right hand side. You will first encounter the on/off rocker switch. The next port is the paralel port. To the left of the paralel port you will find the serial port. This is a 25 pin female port. 
  If you have the cable which came with your Braille 'n Speak, you have all you need to connect your Braille 'n Speak to the Braille Blazer. No other cableing or adapters are required. This cable has an 8-pin connector on one end, which plugs into your Braille 'n Speak's serial port. The

 other end of the cable has a 25 pin male adapter which plugs into the Blazer's serial port.
  Assuming that your Blazer is at the factory default settings, you may need to do very little changes in the configuration menu. To perform a factory reset, hold down all 3 keys as you turn on the Blazer. You will hear the message "ok to reset." Hold down all 3 keys again and you will hear the Blazer say "ok." In a few seconds you should then hear the "Braille Blazer ready" prompt.   Now we need to set up the Blaze

r to work with the Braille 'n Speak. Enter the menu by holding down all three keys. You should hear the Blazer say "configuration, speech config." Press the key closest to you, which is the yes or enter key. You will hear "port serial active." This means that whenever information comes into the Blazer's serial port, the data will be spoken. If you are going to print from the Blazer's serial port, this is probably not what you would want, so we must turn off this feature. Keep pressing the yes key until the 

Blazer says "off."
 Now we need to enter the printer config menu. This can be done by holding down the middle and top buttons at the same time. The printer should say "printer config." Now hit the yes or enter key. The Blazer should say "port parallel active." This means that the Blazer is set to print out the parallel port. For a Braille 'n Speak, the printer must be configured to print out the serial port. To do this, press the bottom button until you hear the printer say "serial."
  The middle button is 

the no or skip key, which will take you to the various options in this menu.  The yes or enter key will cycle you through the choices available to you in each option. For example, if you press the middle button, you will hear "left margin 0 active." If you want to change this setting, then press the yes or enter key. You will be cycled through the different choices for left margin. The top key is the backup key and will take you back to the previous option. 
  Here's an important note concerning formatting.

 If you are going to format your document in the Braille 'n Speak, then the Blazer's format parameters should be set to zero, and word wrap should be turned off. The exception to this is right margin, which cannot be set to zero. You may keep right margin at 34 if you are using 8.5 by 11 inch paper.
  If you are going to format with the Blazer's menu, then set the format parameters in the Braille 'n Speak to zero. In other words, one device should format and the other should not. 
    The "page length" sett

ing should be at 11 for 8.5 by 11 inch paper. 
   Keep pressing the skip or no key and you will cycle through  the different settings available to you. When you hear the message "serial config" press the yes key. These settings must match the Braille 'n Speak in order  for successful printing to take place. Assuming you have done a warm reset on the Braille 'n Speak and the Blazer, these parameters will already be matched. If they do not, you will need to match them up in both devices. The status menu in th

e Braille 'n Speak can be used to alter Braille 'n Speak's communications parameters. Here are some settings which should work.  
9600 baud, 
no parity, 
8 data bits, 
1 stop bit, 
software handshaking.




