1. Introduction 	1

2. Hardware Interface 	2

2.1. PCMCIA 2.0 VoiceCard 	2

2.1.1. General 	2

2.1.2. Establishing the interface 	2

2.1.3. API Calling convention 	2

2.1.4. Handshaking 	2

2.1.5.  Popup Client synchronisation 	2

2.1.6. Tablet 	3

2.2. Internal (PC /SE) 	4

2.2.1. Interface summary 	4

2.2.2. Handshaking 	4

2.2.3. Tablet 	4

2.3. Stand Alone (SA) 	5

2.3.1. Connector 	5

2.3.2. Data protocol 	5

2.3.3. Handshaking 	5

3. Control codes 	6

3.1. Command code summary 	6

3.2. Return code summary 	8

3.3. Text to Speech control code summary 	10

4. Speech Commands 	12

4.1. Speech Control 	12

4.1.1. Speak now 	12

4.1.2. Speak (small delay) 	12

4.1.3. Fast word reading 	12

4.2. Mode Resets 	12

4.2.1. [t] text reading mode reset 	12

4.2.2. [p] Phoneme Reading Mode reset 	13

4.2.3. [x] Dictionary entering mode 	13

4.3. Text Normalizer Resets 	13

4.3.1. alpha literal 	14

4.3.2. digit literal 	14

4.3.3. prosodic punctuation literal 	14

4.3.4. whitespace literal 	14

4.3.5. arithmetic pronunciation 	14

4.3.6. full number 	14

4.3.7.  forced lower case 	15

4.3.8. control character pronunciation 	15

4.3.9. time pronunciation 	15

4.3.10. abbreviation expansion 	15

4.4. Field Resets 	15

4.5. Homograph marker 	15

4.6. Special Punctuation Marks for Changing Prosody 	16

4.7. Voice Characteristic Resets 	16

4.7.1. Speaking Rate 	16

4.7.2. Voiced excitation function 	16

4.7.3.  Unvoiced gain 	17

4.7.4.  Fundamental frequency 	17

4.7.5.  Pitch topline 	17

4.8. Index Markers 	17

4.9. Changing the form of the Reset Commands 	17

4.9.1. Changing the lead-in character 	18

4.9.2.   Double the lead-in character 	18

5. T-T-S (tm) Text Normalizer Performance 	19

5.1. Overview 	19

5.2. Pronouncing Numbers 	20

5.3. Pronouncing Letters and Words 	22

5.4. Homographic Spellings 	23

5.5. Interpreting Punctuation 	23

6. T-T-S (tm) American English Phonemes 	25

6.1. Boundaries and Silence 	25

6.2. Precisely Specifying Stress and Pitch 	25

6.3. Transcription Conventions 	26

6.4. Symbols for Phonemic Transcription of Words 	26

6.4.1. Consonant phonemes: 	26

6.4.2. Vowel phonemes (as they are pronounced in stressed
syllables): 	27



Introduction

Keynote GOLD synthesizers are available in four formats:

In a type II PCMCIA computer card. (Voicecard Model)

For IBM PC and compatible computers using the industry standard
8 bit bus, (PC model)

For selected models of the Toshiba range of portable laptop and
notebook style computers, using the internal modem connection,
(SE model)

As a stand alone synthesizer with a serial RS-232 connection to
the host computer. (SA model)

This document describes the Keynote GOLD speech synthesizer
interface and communication protocol.

Hardware Interface

PCMCIA 2.0 VoiceCard

General

To use the Voicecard, the supplied software driver must be
running.

Establishing the interface

An INTERRUPT 2Fh function is provided to establish an interface
to the voice card driver.

To minimize conflicts with other INT 2F users, the Voicecard
driver may use any multiplex number in the range 20h to 3fh. To
locate the Voicecard multiplex number, execute the Get Voicecard
API interrupt call repeatedly with AH set to each multiplex
number in turn.

INTERRUPT 2Fh, Function 5643 Get VoiceCard API address

Registers at call:	AH=multiplex ID (range 20h to 3fh)

			AL=00

			BX=4B47h  'KG' (Keynote Gold)

			CX=5643h  'VC' (Voice Card)

Return:		AL = FFh

			BX = 4F4Bh 'OK'

			ES:DI = Voice card API function address.

The correct multiplex number is indicated by BX='OK'. To send
commands to the VoiceCard, execute a FAR call to the address
returned in ES:DI.

API Calling convention

The driver API function uses the 'C' calling convention. It
takes a single byte parameter pushed onto the stack, and returns
a char type in AL.

The API function preserves the segment registers and SI, DI, BP,
but may destroy the contents of any other register.

The caller must remove the pushed parameter from the stack when
the VoiceCard driver returns.

Handshaking

Keynote asynchronous commands may be sent at any time.

Keynote synchronous commands, and output text may be sent at any
time. However, the driver will only accept text, and text
synchronous commands if the driver's internal buffer is not
full. Character input which is accepted returns 0. Character
input which is not accepted will return with a BUFFER_FULL
return code (01h).

The asynchronous commands are listed on page 6, synchronous and
text commands on page 10.

 Popup Client synchronisation

The VoiceCard API supplies a busy status flag (page 6). To avoid
possible deadlock, TSR VoiceCard clients  must check this flag
before popping up.

The VoiceCard driver is interrupt driven and uses very little
processing time. The API is available at all times and the
driver is interruptable. System interrupts are left on during
VoiceCard processing.

However, under these conditions it is possible for a pop-up TSR
to pop-up during the VoiceCard processing. If this occurs, and
the pop-up screen reader then waits for speech to finish, the
screen reader will wait forever. Therefore before popping up,
TSRs should check the VoiceCard busy status, and pop up only if
the status return value is zero.

VoiceCard client programs may output text or any synthesizer
commands regardless of the Busy Status value as the API is
available for use at all times.

Tablet

An INTERRUPT 2Fh function is provided to locate the IO address
for the tablet interface.

INTERRUPT 2Fh, Function 5643 Get VoiceCard Tablet address

Registers at call:	AH=multiplex ID (range 20h to 3fh)

			AL=01 (get tablet IO address)

			BX=4B47h  'KG' (Keynote Gold)

			CX=5643h  'VC' (Voice Card)

Return:		AL = FFh

			BX = 4F4Bh 'OK'

			DX = Voice card tablet address in IO space.

The value in DX is the IO address for the tablet trigger port.
The tablet status port is at AX+4. This call can not be made
until the multiplex ID has been found using the Get Voicecard
API interrupt 2Fh call.



	Port 	Address 	Data

	Tablet Trigger Port (Write Only) 	AX

	Tablet status port  (Read Only) 	AX+4 	Bit 0 - Tablet left
button Bit 1 - Tablet Right button Bit 2 - Tablet X Bit 3 -
Tablet Y Bits 4-7  Reserved





Writing arbitrary data to the tablet port triggers the tablet
hardware. Data read from this port is undefined. The tablet
status bits (X and Y) go low immediately, and return to a logic
"1" level after a time period proportional to the position at
which the tablet is being touched.

Touching the tablet at the top left hand corner produces a short
pulse, touching it at the lower right hand corner produces a
long pulse. The maximum delay before the status bits reset
(return to a high level) is usually less than 12ms. The tablet
may not be retriggered less than 4 micro seconds after both x
and y bits have reset.

Internal (PC /SE)

Interface summary

In the following table "input" and "output" are from the point
of view of the host computer.

		Speech port 	Tablet port

	PC Address Jumper in lower position 	2a8 	2ac

	PC Address Jumper in upper position 	2e8 	2ec

	SE Address 	3f8 	3a8

	Input 	Bit 7 - Speech buffer handshake (1=full) Bits 0-6 Status
return value 	Bit 0 - Tablet Y Bit 1 - Tablet X Bit 2 - Tablet
right button Bit 3 - Tablet left button Bit 4 - Speech port
handshake (1=not ready, 0=ready) Bit 5-7 not used

	Output 	8 bit speech data 	Trigger tablet



Handshaking

Two levels of handshaking are used:

Data may only be transferred to the speech card when the port
handshaking bit is low. This handshaking operates on a
character-by-character basis.

In addition text, and text synchronous commands, may only be
sent when the text buffer is not full.

The asynchronous commands are listed on page 6, synchronous and
text commands on page 10.

Tablet

Writing arbitrary data to the tablet port triggers the tablet
hardware. The tablet status bits (X and Y) go low immediately,
and return to a logic "1" level after a time period proportional
to the position at which the tablet is being touched.

Touching the tablet at the top left hand corner produces a short
pulse, touching it at the lower right hand corner produces a
long pulse. The maximum delay before the status bits reset
(return to a high level) is usually less than 12ms. The tablet
may not be retriggered less than 4 micro seconds after both x
and y bits have reset.Stand Alone (SA)

Connector

	Pin 2	Transmit data

	Pin 3	Receive data

	Pin 5	Common

The SA requires a "Straight through" cable to connect to a
standard 9 pin IBM PC serial connector.

Data protocol

Rom version prior to version 7:  38400 Baud 8 data bits 1 stop
bit No parity 	Rom version 7 and later:  9600 Baud 8 data bits 1
stop bit No parity



Handshaking

Keynote asynchronous commands may be sent at any time.

Text, and text synchronous commands may only be sent when the
XON condition is active.Control codes

Command code summary

The commands in the following table may be sent at any time,
independent of speech buffer handshaking status.

Command 	 	Send 	Reply 	 	 	Comment

 	 	(hex) 	VoiceCard PC/SE 	SA Ver<=6 	SA Ver>=7

Reset 		01,.... 				Total restart. Second byte selects language

	English Spanish French German Italian Dutch Japanese  Default
	01,EF 01,EE 01,ED 01,EC 01,EB 01,EA 01,E9  01,E0 	- - - - - - -
 - 	F7 F7 F7 F7 F7 F7 F7  F7 	17 17 17 17 17 17 17  17 	 A null
should be sent after this command, as PC and SE cards discard
the following character.  For SA, assume XOFF until reset
acknowledge is received.

Return Status 		02,.... 				Select status returned by
synthesizer.

	Index 	02,80 	index 	index+80 	index+1C 	Return current index
marker, range 0-63(hex)

	Serial no. 1 	02,81 	00  	00  	80

	Serial no. 2 	02,82 	00  	00  	80

	Serial no. 3a 	02,83 	00  	00  	80

	Self test report 	02,84 	00  	00  	80

	operating error word 	02,85 	00  	00  	80

	version no. 	02,86 	Version 	Version 	Version +80

	exist code 1 	02,87 	7A 	7A  	FA

	exist code 2 	02,88 	58  	58  	D8

	SA status 	02,89 	- 	Packet, see below

	SA low battery acknowledge 	02,8A 	- 	- 	- 	Stops SA "charge
battery" announcement, and low battery status transmission

	language set 1 	02,8B 	Packet, see below 			Returns languages
available

	language set 2 	02,8C 	00  	00  	80

	default language 	02,8D 	Packet, see below  	 		Returns the
power on default language.

	Busy Status 	02,8E 	00 or non zero 	- 	- 	VoiceCard only. TSR
clients must not pop up while the busy flag is non zero.

Instant (asynchronous) speech control commands These commands
affect speech as soon as possible.

	Cutoff 	03  	- 	F5 	15  	Immediately silence speech, and clear
buffers.  For SA, assume XOFF until cutoff acknowledge is
received.

	Speaking rate 	04,(80-FF) 	- 	- 	-

	Volume (not PC) 	05,(80-FF) 	- 	- 	-

Other commands

	Tone () 	06, Duration, Count high, Count low. 	- 	F1 	12
	Reply sent when tone ends.

	Reserved 	07

	Tablet scan (SA only) 	08  	- 	Packet, see below

	Set wakeup timer (SA only) 	09,(81-FF) 	- 	F2  	14  	Set wakeup
timer period. SA sends wakeup code at regular intervals.

	Stop wakeup timer 	09,80 	- 	- 	-

The tone command is 6 bytes long. Duration parameter is one
byte. Count parameters are two byte, most significant byte
first. Counter runs at 2.5Mhz, so Count H = Count L = 1250(dec)
gives a 1KHz tone.

Return code summary

Return 	VoiceCard PC/SE 	SA Ver<=6 	SA Ver>=7 	Comment



Status return range 	00-7F 	00-7F 	80-FF

Index range 	00-63 	80-E3 	1C-7F



Status return packets

Language Set 1 (single byte) 	Bit 0 - English Bit 1 - Spanish
Bit 2 - French Bit 3 - German Bit 4 - Italian Bit 5 - Dutch Bit
6 - Japanese 	As for PC Bit 7=0 	As for PC Bit 7=1 	Sent  in
response to language set 1 request.  Bits are set (1) if the
language is available in the synthesizer.

Default language (single byte) 	01 - English 02 - Spanish 03 -
French 04 - German 05 - Italian 06 - Dutch 07 - Japanese 	As for
PC Bit 7=0 	As for PC Bit 7=1 	Sent in response to default
language request.  Return code indicates default language used
by synthesizer at power on.

SA Status (single byte) 	-  	Bit 0 - Battery low Bit 1 - Tone
active Bit 2 - Buffer full Bit 3 - Charger on Bits 4-6 not used
		Sent in response to SA status request. Bits are set (1) if the
condition is true. Buffer full corresponds to XOFF condition

SA touch tablet (3 byte) 	- 	First byte: Bit 0 - Y7 Bit 1 - Y8
Bit 2 - X7 Bit 3 - X8 Bit 4 - Switch 2 Bit 5 - Switch 1 Bit 6 -
not used  Second byte: Bits 0-6 X coordinate   Third byte: Bits
0-6 Y coordinate  		Three byte packet sent in response to an SA
tablet request.  X and Y coordinates are given as 9 bit numbers.
(0,0) is in the lower right corner.  The switch bits are set if
the switch is being pressed.  X and Y are 1FF when the tablet is
not being touched.

Asynchronous Return Codes (SA only)

Low battery 	- 	F0  	10  	Battery voltage low. This code is
retransmitted every 30 seconds until acknowledged

XON 	- 	F3 	11

Tone finished 	- 	F1 	12  	Sent when tone stops sounding

XOFF 	- 	F4 	13

Wakeup 	- 	F2 	14  	Sent at requested intervals

Cutoff acknowledge 	- 	F5 	15  	Assume XON after this

Power on 	- 	F6 	16  	Assume XON after this

Reset acknowledge 	- 	F7 	17  	Assume XON after this

Goodbye 	- 	FF 	18  	Sent 3 minutes after the first low battery
indication. SA will switch off after sending this code.

Text to Speech control code summary

The following commands are inserted in the text to be spoken.
The commands are acted on as they are reached during speech.
They are therefore known as "synchronous" commands because they
are synchronized to the speech output.

In the following table:

The "space" character (hex 20) is shown as

Where brackets {} delineate numbers, they are not included in
the text sent to the synthesizer. For example[r100] is the
default speech rate command.

Control characters are delineated by <>. For example <CR> is the
carriage return character



Command 	Code 	Comment

Reading

Speak now 	 ~|   or  1F(hex) 	Commence speaking previous text.

Small delay 	} <CR> 	Commence speech, insert a small delay

Fast word reading 	[~2,1] 	Read immediately without waiting for
punctuation

Voice

Speaking rate 	[r{percentage}] 	Percentage of normal speed,
range -90 to 200.

Voiced excitation 	[e{num}] 	{num} from 2 to 7. Whisper = 2,
normal = 3

Unvoiced gain 	[u{num}] 	{num} in units of 0.75db, range -50 to
20.

Fundamental freq 	[f{freq}] 	{freq} in Hz, range 39 to 200

Pitch topline 	[h{num}] 	Alters pitch range of voice. {num} in
range -300 to 100

Index

Index marker 	[i{num}] 	{num} in range 0 - 99(dec)

or 	1D(hex),0-63(hex)  	where the second byte is the index mark
number.

Text Normaliser   "x" is 0 (off) or 1 (on)

Alpha literal 	[n1,x] 	Pronounce names of letters (spelling)
default: off

Digit literal 	[n2,x] 	Pronounce digits individually. default:
off

Prosidic punctuation literal 	[n3,x] 	Pronounce commas, periods
etc. default: off

Whitespace literal 	[n4,x] 	Pronounce space, carriage return,
tab. default: off

arithmetic pronunciation 	[n5,x] 	Read mathematical texts.
Default: off

full number 	[n6,x] 	Inhibit grouping of digits, read full
numbers. default: off

forced lower case 	[n7,x] 	Pronounce uppercase letter groups as
words. Default:off

control character pronunciation 	[n8,x] 	Pronounce control
characters. Default: on

time pronunciation 	[n9,x] 	Pronounce times of day. (e.g. 8:00 =
eight o'clock) Default: on

abbreviation expansion 	[n10,x] 	Default: on

Pronounciation

homograph mark 	~ 	Place immediately ahead of word to select
alternate pronunciation, e.g. minute  ~minute

Prosidy

comma-like pause 	]

period-like pause 	}

stress 	 ~+  	Stress the following word

de-stress 	 ~-  	Remove stress from the following word

emphasis 	~! 	Emphasize the following word (de-stress the rest
of the sentence)

question 	~? 	Produce rising intonation at the end of the
sentence

Mode switching

Text mode 	[t] 	Normal reading mode

Phoneme mode 	[p] 	Following text read according to phoneme
rules (See appendix)

Dictionary mode 	[x] 	Begin dictionary entering mode.

Speech Commands

The following commands are inserted as ASCII characters in the
text input to the synthesizer. They are acted on as the speech
passes that point in the text. In the commands below
indicates space character.

Speech Control

Keynote GOLD will normally begin speaking after punctuation.
However in cases where no punctuation is output to the card, or
where individual words must be spoken separately the following
commands can be used to initiate speech.

Speak now

 ~|

This command initiates speech immediately after the next word.
Words must be delimited by spaces or punctuation. The speak now
command disrupts prosody (intonation) contouring, and should
normally be used only for word-by-word pronunciation. A small
delay is incurred between words using this command. See "fast
word reading" below.

Speak (small delay)

}     <CR>

This command may be used to initiate speech in the absence of
punctuation. Speech begins immediately, and a small comma-like
pause is inserted at the command.

Fast word reading

	[~2,1] is ON. The default [~2,0] is OFF.

Keynote GOLD normally waits for punctuation before it begins to
speak a phrase, in order to use the punctuation marks to develop
prosody contouring. This command set Keynote GOLD to commence
speaking each word as soon as the immediately following word is
received.

This may be used as an alternative to the speak now command
where a number of words must be spoken quickly without
intonation.

Mode Resets

The Keynote GOLD speech synthesizers use the T-T-S(tm) text to
speech system from Berkeley Speech Technologies, Inc. T-T-S
converts ASCII text which is sent to it into spoken output. You
can modify the default speech which Keynote GOLD produces using
T-T-S speech resets.

Resets are typed within square brackets[] when incorporated in
ASCII text sent to Keynote GOLD. Reset variables are enclosed
within curly brackets {} in this documentation but the curly
brackets are not included in text sent to Keynote GOLD. The
format of the resets can be changed; see the end of this section.

[t] text reading mode reset

Keynote GOLD initializes to Text Reading Mode. The operation of
Keynote GOLD in Text Reading Mode is controlled by T-T-S Text
Normalizer Resets. Voice characteristic resets may be used to
alter many aspects of the output to create a wide range of
character voices and special effects.

Use the text reading mode reset to return to text reading mode
after invoking other modes.

[p] Phoneme Reading Mode reset

The most exact way of representing the pronunciation of a spoken
word is by using phonemes, the special symbols which have been
devised for that purpose, and which appear in standard
dictionaries of English. The phoneme reading mode is used for
this purpose.

To enter Phoneme Reading mode enter

		[p]

anywhere in the text. Text following [p] will be read according
to the phoneme symbols on pages 25 - 27. Each phoneme symbol
must be preceded by a space.

Keynote GOLD speech systems have the standard phonemes of
American English. Phonemes unique to other languages are not
available, consequently words of other languages or dialects
will be pronounced in the same way as a typical American speaker
would, not the way a native speaker would. For this reason
Keynote GOLD may refuse to speak certain non-English, or non
Spanish, combinations of phonemes.

[x] Dictionary entering mode

This mode is used to connect any desired phonemic pronunciation
with a designated English letter sequence (normally a word) in
the RAM resident User Dictionary (UD). After a dictionary entry
has been created, the specified phonemic pronunciation is used
every time the word appears in the input text. Using the UD
entries can be pronounced completely differently from the way
they appear in the text, providing a method for automatic
expansion of special abbreviations.

Entries are added to the User Dictionary by associating an
English spelling with its phonemic transcription. To add an
entry, type both the word and the phonemic transcription of how
you want it pronounced in the following form:



	[x]	places Keynote GOLD in Dictionary entering mode.

	ssss	is the English spelling, typed without spaces.

	p p p p	is its pronunciation in phonemes, with each
symbol			preceded by a space.

	[t]	returns to Text Reading Mode.

Each word that you enter must be preceded by a separate "[x]". A
return to text reading mode is only required after the last
entry has been entered, but "[t]" and a carriage return may be
placed at the end of each entry.

The user dictionary mode allows entry of a special phonemic
pronunciation for a specified ASCII sequence into a RAM based
dictionary, so that the special pronunciation is invoked when
the sequence appears in the Keynote GOLD input text.

As the user dictionary is in RAM memory, all definitions will be
lost when the synthesizer is switched off.

Text Normalizer Resets

The T-T-S text normalizer converts everything in the ASCII text
stream input to Keynote GOLD into letters, to be pronounced as
words if possible. It knows about the format and conventions of
written English, and makes decisions based on an analysis of the
way special sequences most often will be pronounced, taking into
account semantic information available in the text.

However, because different types of text use different formats
and conventions the text normalizer resets are provided to allow
you to control the pronunciation of a text. These resets operate
only in text reading mode.

To return T-T-S to its default condition the reset [n0,0] or
simply [n] is used.

alpha literal

	[n1,1] is ON. [n1,0] the default, is OFF.

If the alpha literal reset is on, the letters of the alphabet
will be pronounced as their names. For example, "hello" is
spoken as "h-e-l-l-o".

digit literal

	[n2,1] is ON. [n2,0] the default, is OFF.

Groups of numbers are spoken according to certain conventions.
For instance "2409 Telegraph" is pronounced "twenty four oh nine
telegraph". With the digit literal switch on it, would be "two
four zero nine" instead.

prosodic punctuation literal

	[n3,1] is ON. [n3,0] the default, is OFF.

T-T-S normally does not read punctuation marks aloud, but uses

them to create the prosody or intonation pattern of the
sentence. The punctuation literal pronounces them, as in
"Charles comma Prince of Wales", but does not pronounce the
non-prosodic marks such as the apostrophe in "don't".

whitespace literal

	[n4,1] is ON. Default is [n4,0], OFF.

This reset causes white space characters such as space, carriage
return and tab to be pronounced.

arithmetic pronunciation

	[n5,1] is ON. Default is [n5,0] OFF.

This reset is used for reading mathematical texts. It gives a
variant pronunciation to a special group of characters:

	* becomes "times" instead of "asterisk"

	/ becomes "over" instead of "slash"

	~ becomes "approximately" instead of "tilde"

	! is pronounced "factorial"

	- becomes "minus"



It also produces a special pronunciation of formulas in cases
such as

	1.34 E-6 "one point three four times ten to the minus six"

	2^8 "two to the eight"

full number

	[n6,1] is ON. Default is [n6,0] OFF.

This reset inhibits the normal grouping of numbers of less than
four digits, pronouncing them as full numbers instead. For
instance, "2409" becomes "two thousand four hundred nine"
instead of "twenty four oh nine".

 forced lower case

	[n7,1] is ON. Default is [n7,0] OFF.

Sequences of upper case letters are normally pronounced as the
names of the letters: "IBM" is pronounced "I-B-M". This reset is
used to pronounce them as words, for instance "AFTRA" would be
pronounced as the word "aftra". Some common letter groups such
as DEC are in the system dictionary and are normally pronounced
as words anyway.

control character pronunciation

	[n8,1] is ON, the default. [n8,0] turns it OFF.

T-T-S normally pronounces control characters except for those
used for asynchronous commands.

time pronunciation

	[n9,1] is ON, the default. [n9,0] is OFF.

Normally T-T-S will pronounce times of day, such as "8:00",
"eight o'clock". With this reset OFF "8:00" would be pronounced
literally "eight zero zero"

abbreviation expansion

	[n10,1] is on, the default. [n10,0] is off.

T-T-S normally expands common abbreviations. The expansions are
chosen depending on context, and the condition of the field
resets (see below for field resets). This reset prevents
abbreviations being expanded. It does not affect abbreviations
expansions stored in the user dictionary.

Field Resets

Field resets are used by T-T-S and the Text Normalizer to select
the appropriate pronunciation for the context in the case of
ambiguous spellings and abbreviations. For instance "NE" is
pronounced "Northeast" in a street address, but "Nebraska" when
it is the name of a state.

Field resets are coded in the form [z{code},?] where the "?" can
be 1 for ON or 0 for OFF. These are the Field Marker Resets
which are recognized by T-T-S:

	[z1,?]	personal name

	[z3,?]	organization name

	[z4,?]	street address (room number, floor, apartment etc.)

	[z5,?]	city name

	[z6,?]	state or province, zip code

	[z7,?]	nation

	[z]	restores all fields to default.

Homograph marker

A number of English spellings, "homographs", can be pronounced
in more than one way, for different meanings. For example: wind,
expose, minute, duplicate, buffet. T-T-S assigns ambiguous
spellings their more common pronunciation. However if you place
a tilde (~) in front of the spelling some homographs will be
assigned their alternative pronunciations from the System
Dictionary. For example:

	In less than a minute, ~minute quantities began to appear.

	They tied a bow on the ~bow of the boat.

Special Punctuation Marks for Changing Prosody

The normal English punctuation marks such as period and comma
create prosodic (intonation) contours in sentences which are
read by T-T-S in Text Reading Mode. However, they do not provide
enough information to T-T-S to permit the kind of special
emphasis a human speaker might use for certain kinds of
sentences.

The following additional marks are used by T-T-S to allow you to
add emphasis, change the pitch contour, and introduce pauses.
Using these marks you can have T-T-S pronounce your text with
the desired prosodic nuances, yet retain the regular English
spelling of the words.

	"]"	produces a shorter comma-like pause;



	"}"	produces a shorter period like pause;



	" ~+ "	stresses the immediately following word, if it is 			not
already stressed.



	" ~- "	removes stress from the following word if it is not

		already unstressed.

	"~!"	Emphasizes a particular word in a sentence. This 			is
done by stressing the immediately following 			word, and
de-stressing the words after that.

	"~?"	produces a question with a rising intonation.
The			question mark in English speech is produced both 			with
and without a rising intonation, depending on 			context. This
prosody mark produces the rising			intonation needed by
questions anticipating a yes 			or no answer.

For precise pronunciation of a phrase it is also possible to
enter the text completely as phonemes, in Phoneme Reading Mode.
In Phoneme Reading Mode, a wide variety of pitch and stress
contours can be described. See pages 25 - 27.

Voice Characteristic Resets

Voice characteristic resets can be used singly, or in
combination, to create a variety of "different people", to add
emphasis, excitement, and other personality characteristics to
the T-T-S speech. Voice resets can be used with either the text
reading mode, or the phoneme reading mode.

Speaking Rate

	[r{percentage}]

This Reset controls the rate of speech (i.e. makes the voice
speak faster or slower). {Percentage} is a positive or negative
integer (in the range of -90 to about 200) representing a
percentage change to be applied to the default rate, which is 0.
Positive values increase sound durations by the given ratio,
producing slower speech. The maximum speech rate is about
400-600 words per minute.

Voiced excitation function

	[e{num}]



This Reset changes the excitation function for the voice. {Num}
is from 2 to 7. The default is 3, which produces a precise
pronunciation; value 6 sounds "mellower". The value 2 gives an
entirely voiceless  output (whispering).

 Unvoiced gain

	[u{num}]

This Reset increases or decreases the amplitude of voiceless
segments relative to voiced ones. It determines how prominent
the pronunciation of the sound "s" will be. {Num} can be a
positive or negative integer, in units of 0.75 dB. The default
is 0 and the range is about -50 to 20.

 Fundamental frequency

	[f{freq}]

This Reset determines the overall pitch of the voice. It affects
the inherent pitch characteristics of the speaker, but not the
intonation. {Freq} can be 39-200Hz in integer increments. The
default is 80. A zero value will cause a return to the default
value.

 Pitch topline

	[h{num}]

This Reset changes the pitch range of the voice by increasing or
decreasing the Hz value of the pitch topline. Raising the
topline makes the speaker's intonation sound more excited or
emphatic. {Num} can range from -100 to about 300. The higher the
number, the higher the topline. The default value is 0. Whenever
the fundamental frequency is changed, {num} is reset to the
default value.

Index Markers

For interactive display systems it is often important to know at
which point in previously input text the synthesizer is
currently speaking. Index markers have been provided for this
purpose. The index marker has the form

	[i{num}]

where {num} is an integer between 0 and 127 inclusive. An
alternative code sequence for the Keynote GOLD SA is:

	1D,80-E3 (hex, two byte command)

where the second byte represents an index from 0 to 99 inclusive.

After the Keynote GOLD SE or PC has been instructed to return
index markers the code returned from the lower 7 bits of the
synthesizer port will reflect the last index marker passed
during speech.

The Keynote Gold SA will asynchronously send the appropriate
index value to the host computer as an index marker is passed
during speech, and will repeat the transmission each time it is
sent a "return index" command.

For example, while speaking the  text "The [i1]quick brown
[i2]fox is [i3] asleep[i0]." the index mark returned from
Keynote GOLD will change to 1 at the start of speaking the word
"quick", will change to 2 after speaking the word "brown" and
will change to 0 after speaking the word "asleep".

Index marks can be inserted in any numeric order. The default
index returned is 0. Index markers may only be inserted between
words.

Changing the form of the Reset Commands

Sometimes an ASCII file may contain sequences which could be
incorrectly interpreted as intentional reset commands.  There
are two methods which you can use to avoid having such sequences
interpreted as Resets.

Changing the lead-in character

	[c{dec}]

This command changes the lead-in character to the ascii code
{dec}.  For example, to change the lead-in character to the
ampersand "&", which has an ASCII value of 38, send Keynote GOLD
"[c38]".  All following resets will need to have the form &...].
 To change back to "[" (ASCII 91) send Keynote GOLD "&91]".

  Double the lead-in character

The Reset lead-in character will be interpreted as a normal
character in a text if it is doubled.  For the standard lead-in
character '[' while [x] enters Dictionary Entering mode, the
sequence [[x] remains in Text Reading Mode, and is spoken.T-T-S (tm) Text Normalizer Performance

Overview

This section provides full documentation for the performance of
the standard (default) Text Normalizer Module supplied with the
T-T-S program in the BeSTspeech TM Packages.  Many decisions
made by the default Normalizer can be altered using the Resets
listed on page13 10.

To be read correctly, a text must be interpreted according to
the conventions of written English.  This is the work of the
Text Normalizer.  One of its primary functions is to assign an
unambiguous meaning to characters and constructions that could
be read in different ways in different circumstances.  Here are
some examples:

1.	A semicolon usually signals a prosodic pause; it is not
pronounced:

	   This semicolon is an example; the one in the sentence above
is also.

	However, when a character is cited (enclosed in quotation
marks), it does not signal a prosodic pause but should be
pronounced.  The sentence

		The C language requires a ';' at the end of each statement.

	should be pronounced:

		"the cee language requires a semicolon at the end of each
statement."

2.	The digit "2" contributes to a different pronunciation in
each of the following constructions:

		200	"two hundred"

	12	"twelve"

	2nd	"second"

	20	"twenty"

3.	In addition to ending sentences, periods have a number of
other functions.  For example, they can:

		Mark an abbreviation: "etc"

	Be part of a file name: "command.com"

	Mark an ellipsis: "Well..."

	Be a silent decimal point: "$45.98"

	Be a pronounced decimal point: "3.1416"

4.	A string of uppercase letters is often pronounced as the
names of the letters, while the equivalent lowercase letters
would be pronounced as regular words:

		POW	"prisoner of war"

	ID	"Identification"

	LA	"Los Angeles"

	RIP	"rest in peace"

	SAT	"scholastic aptitude test"

	PA	"public address system"

		(or if the State Field Reset is on, "Pennsylvania")

The Text Normalizer determines how ambiguous constructions like
those illustrated in (1) through (4) above should be pronounced.

How a particular construction should be pronounced often depends
on the format of the text and the conventions it uses.  Because
different types of text use different sorts of conventions, BST
can make application-specific Normalizers on a custom basis.
For some applications, a Normalizer might not be needed at all.

The default BST Normalizer which is included in the T-T-S module
supplied with the BeSTspeech Developer's Package has a number of
features that would be useful for an application that needed to
read generalized sorts of text.  Other features could be built
into more applications-specific systems.

BST's Text Normalizer also gives the user the opportunity to
change the way a text is pronounced through the use of various
pronunciation Resets.  These Resets are mentioned throughout
this document and are discussed specifically on pages 12 - 18.

Pronouncing Numbers

T-T-S pronounces numbers -- i.e., sequences of digits in three
different ways:

1. Literally, as the names of the digits:

	1234	"one two three four"

567	"five six seven"

9001	"nine zero zero one

2. In groups of two:

	1234	"twelve thirty-four"

567	"five sixty-seven"

9001	"ninety oh one"

3. As full numbers:

	1234    	"one thousand two hundred thirty four"

567     	"five hundred sixty-seven"

9001    	"nine thousand one"

Each of these pronunciations is appropriate in different
circumstances.  For example, pronouncing digits in groups of two
is appropriate for dates and addresses:

	In 1985               in nineteen eighty-five"

357 Elmwood St.       three fifty-seven elmwood street"

Pronunciation as a full number is appropriate for dollar amounts:

	$1985     one thousand nine hundred eighty-five dollars"

$357.00   "three hundred fifty-seven dollars and no cents"

A literal pronunciation is appropriate for decimal amounts and
bank account numbers:

	2.1985    "two point one nine eight five"

005237-1  "zero zero five two three seven, one"

The Normalizer pronounces numbers correctly in each type of
context.  To do so, it uses the following conventions:

1.	A string of digits will be pronounced literally if:

a.	The string is five or more digits long:

	1234567   "one two three four five six seven"

70083     "seven zero zero eight three"

b.	The string follows a decimal point:

	12.87     "twelve point eight seven"

3.1416    "three point one four one six"

c.	The digit-literal pronunciation Reset  is on:

	123       "one two three"

1006      "one zero zero six"

	(See page 14 for more information on the digit-literal Reset.)

2.	A string of up to four digits will be pronounced as a full
number if:

a.	It ends in "00" or "000":

	800       "eight hundred"

1200      "twelve hundred"

3000.5    "three thousand point five"

b. 	It is a dollar amount:



$ 279     "two hundred seventy-nine dollars"

$1006     "one thousand six dollars"

c. 	The full number pronunciation Reset is on (while the
digit-literal Reset is off):

	279		"two hundred seventy-nine"

1006	"one thousand six"

	(See 14 for more information on the full number pronunciation
Reset.)

3.	Otherwise, strings of up to four digits are pronounced in
groups of two:

	279		"two seventy-nine"

1006	"ten oh six"

1881	"eighteen eighty-one"

990		"nine ninety"

4.	If a number includes commas marking off thousands, millions,
billions, etc., it will be pronounced as a full number. T-T-S
can pronounce full numbers up to 9,999,999,999,999,999.

	1,006			"one thousand six"

20,000,000		"twenty million"

8,622,401,699,127	"eight billion, six hundred

				 twenty-two million, four hundred one

				 thousand, six hundred ninety-nine point one

				 two seven"

5. 	Two decimal digits following a dollar amount will be
interpreted as cents if at all possible:

	$35.01		"thirty-five dollars and one cent"

$.01		"one cent"

$8.98		"eight dollars and ninety-eight cents"

$8.98 million	"eight point nine eight million dollars"

6.	A digit followed by the appropriate suffix will be pronounced
as an ordinal:

	1st			"first"

11th		"eleventh"

20th		"twentieth"

2,000th		"two thousandth"

53rd		"fifty-third"

22nds		"twenty-seconds"

	The Normalizer recognizes two other special uses of numbers -
phone numbers and times of day - and pronounces them
appropriately.

7.	Phone numbers

	Phone numbers, social security numbers. bank account numbers
and other hyphenated numbers are pronounced literally, with a
prosodic pause at the hyphen.

	841-5083         "eight four one, five zero eight three"

6-59802-1        "six, five nine eight zero two, one"

	However, if a group of three or four digits ends in a string of
zeros, the zeros will be pronounced as a "hundred" or a
"thousand":

	597-8000 	"five nine seven, eight thousand"

333-4400 	"three three three, forty-four hundred"

	These same rules apply to area codes that are enclosed in
parentheses:

	(800) 764-9009    "eight hundred, seven six four, nine zero
zero nine

(415) 841-5083    "four one five, eight four one, five zero
eight three"

	Some hyphenated numbers are not pronounced literally in this
way.  Dates and other short sequences of numbers that are
separated by hyphens are pronounced in groups of 2. For these
numbers, the hyphen is pronounced as "dash":

	1985-86           "nineteen eighty-five dash eighty six"

figure 22-3       "figure twenty-two dash three"

8.	Times of day

	The Normalizer can read times of day of a 12-hour clock.  It
will appropriately read hours, minutes, and seconds:

	6:00	"six o'clock"

6:03:03 	"six oh three and three seconds"

12:59:94.2	"twelve fifty-nine and ninety four point two seconds"

	A special pronunciation Reset allows you to turn the
pronunciation of these numbers as times of day off and on.  See
page 15.

The conventions used by the Text Normalizer give the user a
great deal of control over how numbers are to be pronounced:

The default pronunciation for long sequences (five or more
digits) is digit literal.  To pronounce a long sequence as a
full number, use commas to delimit thousands, millions,
billions, etc.

The default pronunciation for short sequences (up to four
digits) is the one appropriate for dates, addresses, and a
variety of other uses -- in groups of two.  To pronounce these
sequences as full numbers, use the full number pronunciation
Reset.  To pronounce them literally, use the digit-literal
pronunciation Reset. (See page 14)

Pronouncing Letters and Words

The Text Normalizer decides which sequences of letters are
words, which are abbreviations, and which should be pronounced
literally as the names of the letters.

1.	Abbreviations

	The Text Normalizer expands abbreviations where it is
appropriate to do so:

	Prof.  Smith	"professor smith"

63 ft. 11in.	"sixty-three feet eleven inches"

a, b, c, d, etc.         "ey, bee, cee, dee, etcetera"

It can match the same abbreviation spelling to more than one
full word:

	Dr. Jones Dr.	"doctor jones drive"

Sr. Castro, Sr.          "senor castro, senior"

St. Agnes St.	"saint agnes street"

Pt. Lookout	"point lookout"

5 pt.		"five pints"

2.	Pronouncing letters as their names

	The Text Normalizer recognizes when a group of letters should
be pronounced literally, as the names of the letters.  A
sequence of letters will be pronounced literally if:

a.	The sequence lacks any of the six vowel letters (a, e, i, o,
u,

	lp record	"el pee record"

fm radio	"ef em radio"

pH		"pee aitch"

55 mph	"fifty-five em pee aitch"

b. 	The sequence includes only uppercase letters.



USA	"yu ess ey"

OK		"oh kay"

IRS		"aye ar ess"

KFTU	"kay ef tee yu"

	There are some exceptions to this rule that the Normalizer
knows about, for example:

	NATO	"nato"

UNESCO	"unesco"

MS-DOS	"em ess dos"

	The forced lowercase Resets can be used to ensure that
uppercase letters are pronounced as a regular word, rather than
as the names of the letters.  See page 15.

c.	The sequence consists of a single letter:

	o's		"ohs"

A)		"ey"

y-coordinate     "wye coordinate"

program.c	"program dot cee"

d.	The sequence consists of just two letters that do not stand
alone as an independent word:

	76in8 	"seventy-six aye en eight"

file.ri	"file dot ar aye"

Homographic Spellings

Some words have more than one pronunciation, for example:

	read		record		moderate

	entrance	close		wound

	project		invalid		resume

T-T-S will give these words their more frequent pronunciation.
To give them their other pronunciation, simply precede the
spelling with a tilde (~):

	He went in the front entrance.

	His paintings ~entrance me.

	It opens an old wound.

	The clock needs to be ~wound.

Interpreting Punctuation

The Normalizer interprets the significance of various
punctuation marks, pronouncing them only when they are used in
special ways.  For example, a period will be pronounced in the
following sorts of constructions, although it is pronounced
differently in each one:

	command.com	"command dot com"

	9.51			"nine point five one"

	=%.$			"equals percent period dollar sign"

In none of these cases will the period be taken to mark a
prosodic break (as a sentence-final period does).

Unless they are used in a special way, like the periods
illustrated above, punctuation marks are normally not
pronounced.  However, you can have T-T-S pronounce them by
turning on the punctuation-literal pronunciation Reset.  See
page 14 for more information.

T-T-S interprets punctuation marks according to the standard and
accepted conventions of written English.  For the most part, the
user does not need to be concerned with the decisions the Text
Normalizer is making.  However, there are three conventions the
Normalizer uses that must be kept in mind:

1.	The 2-space convention

	In deciding whether a period signifies the end of a sentence,
the Normalizer may, on occasion, make use of the typing
convention that sentences are separated by at least two spaces.

2.	End-of-line hyphens

	T-T-S assumes that all end-of-line hyphens mark true word
boundaries.  Texts prepared for T-T-S should not divide words at
the end of a line.

3.	Periods in abbreviations

	Some abbreviations are spelled the same as words that are not
abbreviations.  For example:

	in		("inches")

fig		("figure")

tab		("table")

apt		("apartment")

no		("number")

Jan		("January")

chap	("chapter")

	For these spellings to be considered abbreviations, they must
be followed immediately by a period.  The Text Normalizer uses
the period to decide on the correct pronunciation.  T-T-S will
pronounce most abbreviations correctly even when the period is
missing, but a period is always needed after an abbreviation
that is spelled like a word:

	It moved 6 in one day.     "it moved six in one day."

It moved 6 in. one day.    "it moved six inches one day."

	apt 2B		  "apt two bee"

apt. 2B		  "apartment two bee"

	No Carolina tobacco        "no carolina tobacco"

No. Carolina tobacco       "north carolina tobacco"

T-T-S (tm) American English Phonemes

Additional Phonemic Symbols for Transcribing Long Passages



Some users might want to transcribe long passages phonemically
for reading in Phoneme Mode.  This technique provides very
precise control of pronunciation of words and of intonation
contours.  Full transcriptions give excellent results for
messages that are often repeated, and which can use special
prosodic contours to convey additional meaning in particular
applications.  For example, warning messages in an alarm system
might use specially transcribed messages to signal extreme
urgency through prosodic emphasis.

Boundaries and Silence

In phoneme-reading mode the boundaries between words and larger
prosodic units must be marked.  The following boundary symbols
are used:

	$W			word boundary

	$C			a major prosodic boundary

	$P			a minor prosodic boundary

A prosodic pause can be inserted into the speech stream by using
the symbol for silence:

	sl			silence

Each "sl" symbol represents about 80 milliseconds of silence.
Longer periods of silence can be obtained by concatenating more
than one "sl".  Utterances that are transcribed without "sl"
will be pronounced with the words run together as if in a single
phrase.

Precisely Specifying Stress and Pitch

It is possible to fine-tune the intonation contours of a
phonemically transcribed passage by the use of stress and pitch
markers.  The best way to learn to use these is by experimenting
and listening carefully to the result.

Stress is indicated by a dollar sign ($).  Pitch is indicated by
a pound sign (œ).  These signs are followed by a digit that
indicates the level of stress or pitch.  Higher numbers indicate
higher levels.

As noted earlier, primary stress in words can be be marked by
placing the symbol ' after the vowel of the most-stressed
syllable in a word.  Using the ' symbol has the same effect as
using the stress level indicator $6.

The stress and pitch levels for secondary word stress " are: $5
œ4.  The default stress level is $2 (for unstressed syllables).

When transcribing a full text, stress and pitch markers may be
used to specify utterance-level intonation, not just word-level
stress.  A full range of stress markers (from $8 to $1) is
available in phoneme-reading mode, giving you the abilitv to
transcribe a wide variety of stress patterns:

	$8	highest stress level

	$6	equivalent to primary word stress

	$5	equivalent to secondary word stress

	$2	default (unstressed) level

	$1	lowest stress level

Stress markers mainly affect the duration and amplitude of
syllables.  The marker must immediately follow the vowel of the
syllable it marks.  Unmarked vowel phonemes are assigned default
stress.

Pitch markers are also used to specify the intonation contour of
an utterance.  So that many different kinds of contours can be
specified, a wide range of pitch targets is made available, from
œ10 to œ3:

	œ10	highest

	œ6	pitch target for primary stressed syllables

	œ-3	lowest

Pitch targets are associated with:

(1)	Syllables, and

(2)	"$C" and "$P" prosodic boundary markers.

On syllables, pitch markers immediately follow the stress
marker.  If a syllable has no stress marker, the pitch target
immediately follows the vowel phoneme for the syllable.  Pitch
targets on boundaries immediately follow the boundary marker.

Unmarked prosodic boundaries receive a default pitch target.
However, unlike stress, there is no default pitch marking for
syllables.  The actual pitch levels for unmarked syllables are
interpolated from surrounding pitch targets.

Boundaries can be marked with as many as two pitch targets.  Two
pitch targets should appear on boundaries that have words both
to the right and to the left.  The first target will be the
final pitch level for the words that precede the boundary and
the second target will be the pitch onset for the words that
follow the boundary.  The initial and final "$C" of a text
should each have only one pitch target.

Syllables can also have up to two pitch targets.  However,
usually a single target is sufficient.  Two pitch targets are
permitted on stressed syllables only to allow for very rapid
rises and falls in pitch.

Transcription Conventions

If you transcribe a text completely into phonemes to be read in
phoneme-reading mode it should start with a [p] reset and end
with a [t].  The first symbol in the transcription should be
"$C" or "$P".  The transcription should end with the sequence
"sl $C;" (a silence, a prosodic boundary, and a semi-colon.) The
minor prosodic boundary "$P" can also be used at the end.  A
default pitch target will be placed automatically if none is
specified following any prosodic boundary, but a different pitch
target may be specified instead if desired.

Symbols for Phonemic Transcription of Words

One symbol is used for each distinctive sound (phoneme) of
standard American English.  In the lists below, each phoneme is
illustrated by a list of example words in which it appears and
arranged to demonstrate the contrasts between similar sounds.

Consonant phonemes:

w	---	watt	wet	woo	quit	Duane	wham

y	---	yacht	yet	you	use	argue	yam

h	---	hot	heard	who	hi	ahoy	ham

m	---	sum	ramp	my	limb	ample	moose

n	---	sun	rant	nigh	Lynn	handle	noose

ng	---	sung	rank	drunk	long	ankle	pinging

l	---	lots	stole	feel	sold	lily	fled

r	---	rots	store	fear	soared	rare	Fred

f	---	fat	half	rough	lift	phase	off

v	---	vat	have	shove	lived	cover	vivid

th	---	booth	author	ether	anthem	thesis	therapy

dh	---	smooth	other	either	rhythm	these	there

s	---	sue	bus	lace	recent	city	oxen

z	---	zoo	buzz	lays	resent	zitty	exact

ch	---	batch	chin	hitch	nature	virtual	church

jh	---	badge	gin	Jeff	soldier	gradual	judge

sh	---	bash	shin	chef	nation	racial	mission

zh	---	beige	measure	vision	fusion	casual	seizure

b	---	bats	robe	baby	beak	obey	amble

p	---	pats	rope	puppy	speak	opaque	ample

d	---	door	mad	dime	did	buzzed	road

t	---	tore	mat	time	strut	bussed	wrote

g	---	got	rag	ogre	Greg	agog	figs

k	---	cot	rack	ocher	quake	pique	fix

Vowel phonemes (as they are pronounced in stressed syllables):

i	---	beet	leak	ease	we	ski	eel

I	---	bit	lick	is	spirit	hear*	ill

e	---	bait	lake	came	way	steak	ale

E	---	bet	Lech	desk	merry	head	el

ae	---	bat	lack	ask	graph	had	AI

u	---	boot   	Luke	dune	move	stew	cooed

U	---	put 	look	bush	lure	tour	could

o	---	boat	choke	flow	woe	oboe	code

O	---	bought	chalk	flaw	store*	long	cawed

a	---	pot	lock	spa	mark	starry	cod

^	---	but	luck	done	just	hull	cud

R	---	Bert	lurk	earn	mirth	journey	curd

ay	---	bite	like	hire	why	eyes	aisle

Oy	---	boy	join	hoist	coy	oink	oil

aw	---	bout	pound	house	cow	ouch	owl

Any of the vowel phonemes listed above for stressed syllables
can appear in unstressed syllables as well.  For example, the
final syllable of "lucky" has the same vowel phoneme ("i") as
"keep".  Those forms starred (*) contain vowels which are
conventionally considered to be lax due to the following "r".
There is an additional vowel phoneme ("=") that only appears in
unstressed syllables.

	=	---	canal (1st syllable)	support (1st syllable)

			action (2nd syllable)	tickle (2nd syllable)

Stress symbols in words are placed after the vowel of the
stressed syllable.  Primary stress is a single quote ';
secondary stress is double quotes ".  Boundaries between words
in multiword transcriptions are marked by the symbol $W.

Stress marks and phoneme symbols must always be preceded by a
space.  If a phoneme symbol is made up of two characters ("sh")
they must be kept together.  For example:

	quiche			k i ' sh

	pizza			p i ' t s =

	fettuchine 		f E " t = ch i ' n i

	three bedroom	[x]3BR th r i " $W b E ' d r u m [t]

				(UED abbreviation)Keynote GOLD Speech Synthesizers
