                           KEYNOTE GOLD

                       SA SPEECH SYNTHESIZER









                 THE KEYNOTE GOLD S A SYNTHESIZER.



                             CONTENTS


           1.             Introduction

           2.             Description

           3.             Power Supply

           4.             Computer Connection

           5.             The Touch Tablet

           6.             Aicom Emulation

           7.             Specifications







                         COPYRIGHT NOTICE

All rights reserved.  No part of this publication may be
reproduced in any form whatsoever without the express written
permission of Pulse Data International Limited.

Every effort has been made to ensure that the information
contained in this manual is correct at the time of issue.
Neither Pulse Data International Limited nor its agents assume
responsibility for errors or omissions in this information.  No
liability is assumed for damages resulting from the use of this
information.

Copyright (c) 1994 by Pulse Data International Limited,
Christchurch, New Zealand.
Text-to-Speech Copyright (c) 1990,1991,1992,1993,1994 by Berkeley
Speech Technologies, Berkeley, California, USA.




                 THE KEYNOTE GOLD S A SYNTHESIZER.


1.   INTRODUCTION.

This chapter describes the Keynote GOLD S A Speech Synthesizer
and its connection to your computer.

The Keynote GOLD S A is a small, portable, stand alone speech
synthesizer.  It provides high quality speech from an integral
speaker, and includes a headphone jack for personal listening.

The Keynote GOLD S A can be used with Pulse Data International
software, such as MasterTouch, a screen access program; KeySoft,
a talking personal information program; and SoundProof, a reading
reinforcement package.  It may also be used with the IBM Screen
Reader.


2.   DESCRIPTION.

To familiarize yourself with the S A, place it on a flat surface.
The shorter side with three connectors should be away from you.
This is the back.  The top face has one set of loudspeaker slots
towards its rear, while the bottom has two sets of slots.  You
should take note of the following 6 features.

The On Off Switch is the only control on the right hand side,
about half way along.  This is a rocker switch.  Press the side
towards you to turn on, and the S A will say "Keynote Gold".
Press the side away from you to turn off.

The Volume control is on the front, towards the left.  Use your
thumb to move the control to the right for increased volume, or
to the left for less.

The Headphone Socket is also on the front, towards the right.
Your headphones should be equipped with a 3.5 millimeter stereo
jack plug.  If you plug into this socket, the loudspeaker will be
cut out, allowing you to listen to the headphones without
disturbing other people.

The Power Connector is on the rear face, to your right.  The A.C
adapter should be plugged in here.  Since the S A contains its
own battery, the A.C adapter need not always be used.  Battery
charging is covered in Section 1.3.

The Computer Connector is on the rear face, at the center.  This
is a nine pin, female, miniature D socket.  The interface cable
should be connected between this connector and the serial port on
the computer.

The Tablet Connector is on the rear face, to your left.  If you
are using a Master Touch tablet, it would be plugged in here.


3.   POWER SUPPLY.

The S A can be operated from A.C power, or from its own internal
rechargeable battery.

If the unit is not often moved, it may be used on A.C power
continuously.  Locate the small round connector on the A.C
adapter, and insert it into the power connector at the right rear
of the S A.  Plug the adapter into a wall socket and switch on.
The S A should say, "A.C adapter On", at this point or when it is
turned on, to indicate that the A.C adapter is connected and
powered.  If the A.C adapter is not correctly connected, or the
A.C is switched off, you will hear, "A.C adapter Off", when you
turn on the synthesizer.

The S A may also be used with the A.C adapter switched off or
disconnected.  If the battery is fully charged, then an operating
time between 6 and 12 hours may be expected.  As the S A saves
power automatically when it is silent, battery life will depend
on how much time is spent speaking.

The battery may be charged by the A.C adapter while the S A is
switched on or off.  You should allow 14 hours for a full charge,
although charging for longer will cause no harm.  If you are
relying on the battery for portable operation, you should cycle
the battery occasionally to maintain its capacity.  About once a
month, turn the A.C adapter off and leave the S A switched on
until it announces, "Charge battery".  At this stage the battery
will be fully discharged.  Now connect the A.C adapter and charge
for at least 14 hours.
If the S A has not been used for some time, the battery may be
completely flat.  This can temporarily prevent operation, even
with the A.C adapter connected.  If the unit does not say,
"Keynote Gold", when it is turned on, then switch it off and
allow the battery to charge from the A.C adapter for a few
minutes, and then try again.


4.   COMPUTER CONNECTION.

An interface cable is provided with your Keynote Gold S A.
Select the connector which has pins, and plug it into the
connector at the center rear of the S A.  This connector is not
symmetrical, so if it does not engage, try it the other way up.
Fasten the connector securely with the two locking screws.  The
other end of the cable goes to your computer's serial port, which
may have a 9 or a 25 pin connector.  In either case you will be
supplied with the appropriate cable.  If your computer has two
serial ports, you may connect the synthesizer to either one.

Switch on the S A, and you are ready to install and run your
speech software.


5.   THE TOUCH TABLET.

If you want to use the touch tablet, switch off the S A before
plugging in.  Locate the telephone-style connector on the end of
the tablet cable.  This has a small catch on its lower side,
which clicks into the connector at the left rear of the S A.  To
disconnect the tablet you must first lift the catch.


6.   AICOM EMULATION.

You may use your Keynote Gold synthesizer with a speech program
which does not support it.  This is done by installing a special
driver on your computer.  The speech program can then be set up
for an Aicom synthesizer, but you will have the benefit of
Keynote Gold speech.

The driver is provided on a floppy disk, together with an
installation program.  This program copies the driver onto your
hard disk.  It will also add a line to the config.sys file, so
that the driver is loaded whenever the computer is started or
re-booted.


6.1.   INSTALLATION.

To install the driver, locate the floppy disk which is provided
with your Keynote Gold synthesizer, and insert it into the "A" or
"B" drive of your computer.  At the DOS prompt, type:

      a:install
or
      b:install

and press ENTER.  This will copy the driver into the \keynote
directory of your hard disk.  It will also add the line:

      device=c:\keynote\golddev.sys

to the config.sys file.  If the install program detects DOS
version 6 or later, it will add a preceding line:

      [common]

To load the driver you should now reboot your computer.  First
remove the floppy disk, then press CONTROL, ALT and DELETE.  That
means: press and hold CONTROL, then press and hold ALT, and
finally press DELETE.  Release all keys.  Allow about 10 seconds
for the computer to reboot.

If the driver has been loaded, you will hear:

      "Goldcard driver successfully installed."

You may now install and run speech software, which should be set
up for an Aicom Accent PC synthesizer.

The installation program provides certain options. These can be
selected by
the addition of a parameter after the "install" command.
Multiple parameters should be separated by a Space, and may be
placed in any order.


6.2.   CHOICE OF DRIVE AND DIRECTORY.

You may install the driver into a directory other than
c:\keynote.  To do this, add the required path name.  For
example, to install into a directory called "new", on the D
drive, type:

      a:install /path=d:\new ENTER.

Do not put spaces in the path parameter.  The installation
program will create the directory if it doesn't exist, and will
install the driver there.


6.3.   BAUD RATE OPTIONS.

If your computer has two serial ports, you may connect an S A
synthesizer to either.  The installation program will
automatically choose the correct COM port for the synthesizer.
This check could affect a printer or modem attached to the other
port during installation.  If this is a problem, specify the
speech port directly by typing:

      a:install /com=1 ENTER, or
      a:install /com=2 ENTER,

for port 1 or 2 respectively.  The automatic test will then not
run.  This parameter may also be used if your computer has more
than one synthesizer, and you wish to select a Stand Alone.

The device driver automatically senses the baud rate used by a
Keynote Gold Stand Alone synthesizer.  Certain screen readers
continually reset the baud rate to 9600, which can be a problem
with earlier Stand Alones operating at 38400 baud.  To overcome
this, use the format:

      a:install /fbaud ENTER

Do not use this parameter with the Arkenstone Open Book.


6.4.   ERROR MESSAGES.

If an error occurs during installation of the device driver, the
install program will use the synthesizer to speak an error
message if possible.  If this is not possible, a screen message
will state:

      "Please check the installation of your speech synthesizer
and retry the installation program."

This may happen, for example, if the synthesizer is not plugged
into the computer.

When the install program can access the synthesizer, an error
message will be spoken if the driver installation cannot be
completed.  If a message indicates a problem with the /path
parameter, the command should be checked and re-entered.

If you hear a spoken error message concerning a lack of  free
memory, or a problem with config.sys, you should contact your
Keynote Gold distributor for assistance.


7.   S A SPECIFICATIONS.

The case measures:  8 inches long, by 4 inches wide, by 1.2
inches thick; or 200 by 110 by 30 millimeters.

Weight:             1.5 pounds, or 700 grams.

Controls:           On-off switch and volume control.

Connectors:         A.C adapter, computer interface, headphones,tablet.

Interface:               Serial, RS232C, 9 pin female miniature
D connector.  At the S A, pin 2 = transmit data, pin 3 = receive
data, pin 5 = common.  Use a "straight through" cable to a
standard 9 pin computer serial port.

Audio power:        500 milliwatt.

Charger:            9 volt dc, regulated, 300 milliamp or more.

Charger connector:  Circular, 5.5 millimeter outer,
2.5 millimeter hollow inner.  Center positive.




                   IN CASE OF RADIO INTERFERENCE

This equipment generates and uses radio frequency energy and if
not installed and used properly, in strict accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions, may cause interference to radio and
television reception.  Any unauthorized modification to this
equipment could result in the revocation of your authority to
operate the equipment.

It has been type tested and found to comply with the limits for a
class B computing device in accordance with the specifications in
Subpart J of Part 15 of FCC Rules, which are designed to provide
reasonable protection against such interference in a residential
installation.  However, there is no guarantee that interference
will not occur in a particular installation.  If this equipment
does cause interference to radio and television reception, which
can be determined by turning the equipment off and on, the user
is encouraged to try to correct the interference by one or more
of the following measures:

  -Reorient the receiving antenna
  -Relocate the computer with respect to the receiver
  -Move the computer away from the receiver
  -Plug the computer into a different outlet so that the computer
and receiver are on different branch circuits.

If necessary, the user should consult the dealer or an
experienced radio/television technician for additional
suggestions.  The user may find the following booklet prepared by
the Federal Communications Commission helpful:

  "How to Identify and Resolve Radio-TV Interference Problems"

  This booklet is available from the U.S. Government Printing
Office, Washington,20402, Stock No. 004-000-00345-4.

  If this equipment is supplied with a shielded cable it must be
used in order to meet FCC Class B emission limits.
