		   
		   DECTalk USB Users Manual



Access Solutions
4536 Edison Avenue
Sacramento, CA 95821
Web: www.axsol.com
E-Mail: support@axsol.com
Customer Support: (916) 481-3559




The information in this publication is subject to change without
notice.  Axsol, Inc. DBA Access Solutions reserves the right to make changes
without notice to this, or any of its products, to improve reliability,
performance, or design.

Axsol, INC. SHALL NOT BE LIABLE FOR TECHNICAL OR EDITORIAL
ERRORS OR OMISSIONS CONTAINED HERIN, NOR FOR INDIRECT, SPECIAL,
INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES RESULTING FROM THE FURNISHING,
PERFORMANCE, OR USE OF THIS MATERIAL.  THIS INFORMATION IS PROVIDED "AS
IS" AND Axsol, INC. EXPRESSLY DISCLAIMS ANY AND ALL
WARRANTIES, EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY, OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING
WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY EXPRESS, STATUTORY, OR IMPLIED WARRANTY OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.

This publication contains information protected by copyright. This
publication shall not be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a
retrieval system, nor its contents used for any purpose, without the
prior written consent of Axsol, Inc.

Axsol, Inc. assumes no responsibility for the use of any
circuitry other than the circuitry that is part of a product of 
Axsol, Inc.  Axsol, Inc. does not convey to the purchaser
of the product described herein any license under the exclusive rights of
Axsol, Inc. nor the rights of others.
    


FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC) CLASS-B WARNING.

This device generates and uses radio frequency energy. If not installed
and used properly, the device may interfere with radio or television
reception.

FCC COMPLIANCE - 

This device has been tested and certified to comply with the limits for
a Class-B digital device, as defined in part 15 of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) rules. Class-B limits are designed to
provide reasonable protection against radio/television interference in
a residence.

This product is in conformity with the following directives and/or
standards:

    89/336/EEC on the Electromagnetic Compatibility of Information
    Technology Equipment using the following standards:
    EN55022:1998 Class B Limits and methods of
    Measurement of Radio Interference Characteristics of Information
    Technology Equipment.
    EN55024:1998 A1:2001 A2:2003 Electromagnetic Compatibility - Generic
    immunity standard - Part 1:  Residential, commercial and light industry.

    93/68/EEC on the labeling of equipment.

The DECtalk USB is supplied with a full speed USB cable 
and a standard 9 pin serial cable for
connecting the unit to a computer system. Both these cables are equipped with
an in-line filter. The DECtalk USB must only be used with cables
that incorporate a similar in-line filter.

To comply with FCC regulations, you must use shielded cables with this
device. Operation with unapproved equipment or unshielded cables is
likely to result in interference with radio or television reception.
Changes made to this device without the approval of Axsol, Inc. could
void your authority to operate the device.

The device may cause interference even though it meets Class-B limits.
(As a test, turn the device off and on, and gauge the effect on an
operating radio or television.) If there is interference, try to
eliminate it by one or more of the following measures:

    Re-orientating or relocating the receiving antenna of the radio or
    television.

    Increasing the separation between the device and receiver.

    Connecting the device into an outlet on a circuit different from
    that to which the receiver is connected.

    Consulting the dealer or an experienced radio/television technician
    for additional suggestions.


CAUTION - ELECTRIC SHOCK AND FIRE HAZARD:

This unit is for indoor use only, and is to be powered only by the
supplied AC power supply.  Never allow the wiring or connector attached
to the battery to become damaged or shorted, for this can result
in ignition or explosion of the battery.

Avoid operation in extremely moist or humid environments.

FOR USE WITH A CERTIFIED POWER SUPPLY, WITH CLASS 2 OUTPUT; RATED
    OUTPUT 6.0Vdc, 500mA min.
    Input: 120vac 60Hz, 7.5W
    Output: 6.0Vdc 500ma
    UL: E175399, 3D81
    Manf: Xicon
    Part#: 106054

There are no user-serviceable components inside the DECtalk USB. Opening the 
unit may present a shock hazard, and any modification to the product 
will void your guarantee. If water or any other liquid gets accidentally 
spilled on the unit, turn the unit off and disconnect all cables. 
Wipe the unit down with a dry cloth and allow the unit to dry out
for several hours. If the unit fails to operate correctly, contact
Access Solutions for further assistance.


			Table of Contents

     Section 1.0 - Introduction
     Section 1.1 - System Requirements
     Section 1.2 - Installation
     Section 1.3 - Installation Problems 
     Section 1.4 - Screen Access Driver Support
     Section 1.5 - Trouble Shooting
     Section 1.6 - Advanced Features
     Section 1.7 - Specifications
  

Section 1.0

			   INTRODUCTION

     The DECTalk USB is a serial text to speech synthesizer 
     capable of being connected to a computer via a standard USB or
    RS232 serial port.  Taking advantage of todays modern technology,
the DecTalk USB is a state of the art text to speech synthesizer
that presently is capable of speaking in six different languages,
fully software configurable and updatable, light weight and
portable, and delivers a quality of speech that you would only expect
from DECtalk.  Unlike most serial synthesizers, the DecTalk USB takes full
advantage of the high speed transfer rates of the USB bus.  In
simple terms, start and stop speech commands to the synthesizer
appear to be instantaneous. 
     As an added bonus, the DECTalk USB comes equipt with a
standard RS232 serial port for use with computers or equippment that 
does not offer USB support.  The on board RS232 serial port is
fully backwards compatible with the older DecTalk Express.  In other 
words, the DecTalk USB may be used as a direct replacement for
the older retired DECtalk Express.  A slide switch located on the
righthand end of the synthesizer is used to switch between USB  and
RS232 modes respectively.  When the slide switch is slid toward the back 
of the unit, you are in USB mode.  With the slide switch slid toward the 
front of the unit, you are in RS232 mode.  With a user replaceable 9 volt
battery, Your DECTalk USB is capable of operateing for 1 hour on a standard 
RS232 serial port before an external power source is required.  

     The DecTalk USB has 9 predefined voices,
software adjustable volume levels, speed, pitch, treble, bass,
and is fully configurable to meet your listening preferences.  In
addition, parameters such as articulation, punctuation filtering,
and intonation are also adjustable.  It is important to note that
these settings may be limited by certain software packages such as
screen access programs.


Supported Languages:

The DecTalk USB is a serial text to speech synthesizer that
converts standard ASCII or Unicode text into highly intelligible
and natural sounding speech.  Supported languages include U.S.
English, U.K. English, Castilian Spanish, Latin-American Spanish,
German, and French.


Speech Engine:

Powered by Fonix DecTalk, the DecTalk USB utilizes a high
performance 150Mhz Motorola DragonBall processor in conjunction
with 32MB of SDram to execute its embedded software speech engine.
With 16MB of flash memory, the DecTalk USB is able to store six
different language modules as well as user dictionaries for each
spoken language. 


Software Updatable:

The DecTalk USB is fully programmable and may be updated while in
the field.  Since the speech engine of the DecTalk USB is a
software embedded solution, enhancements to the speech engine are
easily upgradable. 


Audio Output:

The DecTalk USB is equipped with an internal 63mm 1 watt speaker
for  delivering its excellent synthesized speech output. Volume
levels are  adjustable via a side mount rotary thumb wheel or by
software control.  In addition, a eighth inch stereo jack is
located on the side of the unit  for use with headphones or, with
an additional adapter, power speakers respectivly.
	  
	  
Connectivity, Connectors and Controls:                                 

The DECtalk USB may be connected to an IBM or compatible computer
using a full speed USB cable or a standard RS232 serial cable. 
Selection of which port is active, either the USB or RS232 port, is
controlled via a slide switch located on the side of the unit.
With the controls and connectors labeled counter clockwise around the
unit and starting with the thumb wheel, the controls and connectors  
are as follows:
   1. Volume-On/Off thumb wheel
   2. Headphone jack 
   3. USB/RS232 mode switch
   4. Nine pin RS232 serial port (DCE)
   5. USB serial port (full speed 1.1)
   6. D.C power jack


Software:

     With support for Windows 98/ME/2k/XP/Vista , the DECTalk USB is
easy to install and ready to start speaking.  All the software
necessary for installation and supporting many of
todays' most popular screen readers is included.  
     
     Access Solutions continues to develop drivers for many 
of todays most popular screen access programs.  For more
information,     
contact Access Solutions technical support team at (916) 481-3559
or
email us at support.axsol.com. 



Section 1.1

		       System Requirements
	  
The DECTalk USB is designed to operate in an IBM or compatible
micro computer with a  USB or standard RS232 serial port.  If you
are not sure 
if your computer is equipped with a USB or RS232 port, we recommend
contacting your computer vendor or refer to your computers' user
manual.
     
Currently the DECTalk USB functions with Windows 98/ME/2k/XP/Vista. 
In addition, the DECtalk USB has Dos box support under windows 98.

       

Section 1.2

			   Installation

     It is strongly recommended that a qualified technician
performs the hardware and software installation needed to get your
new DECTalk USB up and running.  Access Solutions does not
warrant products that are damaged due to improper handling or
faulty installation. 

     To install the DECTalk USB, follow the two procedures
listed below:


  Hardware Procedure:
	    
    USB Connection -

    1. Make sure the DECTalk USB is turned off. This is done
       by turning the thumb wheel counter clockwise until a click
is heard.
    
    2. MAKE SURE THE SLIDE SWITCH LOCATED ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE
UNIT IS POSITIONED TOWARDS THE BACK OF THE UNIT.  I.E AWAY FROM THE
HEADPHONE JACK OR VOLUME KNOB.

    3. Boot your computer to a standard windows desktop.

    4. Connect the USB cable, included in your installation kit,
       from the DECTalk USB to one of the USB ports located
       on the back of your computer.  Keep in mind that some
computers
       have several USB ports. Any of these ports will work.


    RS232 Serial Port Connection - 
    
    If you plan to use the RS232 serial port on your DECTalk USB,
    it is strongly recommended that you exit all programs and turn 
    your machine off before connecting the serial cable from your
unit
    to your computer.

    1. Make sure the DECTalk USB is turned off. This is done
       by turning the thumb wheel counter clockwise until a click
is heard.
    
    2. Position the slide switch located on the right side of the unit 
       towards the headphone jack.

    3. Locate the 9 pin streight through serial cable and connect
it
       from the DECTalk USB to one of the serial ports on the 
       back of your computer.

    4. Insert the female barrel connector of the D.C adapter,   
       included in your installation kit, into the power jack
located
       on your unit. If you plan to connect both the USB and serial
cables 
       from the DECTalk USB to your computer, the D.C adapter is
not 
       required.

       It is important to note that your new DECTalk USB contains
       a 9 volt alkaline battery that is user replaceable. The
       purpose of this battery is to supply power to the unit while
       operating the unit solely on the RS232 serial port. Located on    
       the bottom left hand side of the unit is a rectangular cover that
       closes off the battery compartment. Using an index finger, gently 
       press down on the ribbed end of the battery cover and slide the
       cover in the direction away from the volume knob or headphone
       jack. This will expose the Eveready 9 volt alkaline battery
       that ships with the unit.  



  Software Driver Installation Procedure:

    USB Windows Driver Support -
    
    1. Make sure you are on the windows desktop.

    2. Make sure the USB/RS232 mode switch is positioned towards the
       back of the unit.

    3. Turn your DECTalk USB on by turning the thumb wheel
       clockwise.

    4. When the Add New Hardware Wizard comes up informing you 
       that a DECTalk USB has been detected, insert the     
       DECTalk USB installation Disk into your CD  drive and
press
       Enter.

    5. When prompted for whether or not windows should search for
       the best driver for this device, select the radio button
that
       allows windows to search for the best driver for this device
and press 
       Enter.
	  
    6. Next, check the check box labeled "Specify a Location". 

    7. In the edit box, type  the name of your CD drive, for example "D:" and press Enter. 
    
    8. The add new hardware wizard will inform you that the      
       Access Solutions DECTalk USB has been found. Just press
Enter.

    9. Once you have reached this point, the add new hardware
       wizard should inform you that it has successfully installed
all the 
       necessary files needed for supporting your new DECTalk USB. 
       Just press Enter and you are all done.
	  
    10. Remove the DECTalk USB installation disk from your CD
drive. 
    
    11. Reboot your system so changes may take effect. 


    RS232 Serial Port Driver Support -

    It is not necessary to install any drivers for RS232 serial
    port support.  
    


Section 1.3    

			     Installation Problems
    
    USB Installation Problems -

    The DECTalk USB is a fully compliant USB Plug and Play
    device that  does not require an IRQ when operating on the USB
bus.     
    If you are having trouble installing the necessary files needed
for 
    supporting your DECTalk USB as a USB device, try the following:

    1. Make sure the supplied USB cable included in your
installation
       kit is used to connect the DECTalk USB to your computer.
       Since the DECTalk USB is a full speed USB device, use
       of low speed USB cables may cause loss of data and
installation
       problems.

    2. Make sure your DECTalk USB is turned on before trying to
install
       software.
    
    3. Make sure the USB/RS232 mode switch is slid towards the back
       of the unit for USB mode.

    4. From within Device Manager, expand the folder labeled
       "Universal Serial Bus Controllers". Make sure you have at
least
       two entries labeled simular to the following:
	  A. USB Root Hub
	  B. PCI to USB Universal Host Controller

       If you do not have a folder under Device Manager labeled
       "Universal Serial Bus Controllers", USB support is either
turned
       off in your bios or your computer may not support USB.
       Consult your computers' user manual to verify bios settings
and 
       USB support.


    RS232 Serial Port Installation Problems -

    If you are having trouble getting your DECTalk USB to function
    on a communication port, try the following:

    1. Make sure both ends of the serial cable connecting your 
       computer to the DECTalk USB are seated well in their
respective 
       connectors. 
    
    2. Make sure the USB/RS232 mode switch is positioned towards the   
       headphone jack and or volume thumb wheel.

    3. Plug in the D.C adapter to insure the unit has adequate
power.    
       This can also be accomplished by connecting the USB cable
       from the DECTalk USB to your computer.
    
    If you are still having trouble after trying the above
suggestions,
    it is recommended that you contact Access Solutions technical
    support team at (916) 481-3559. You may also Email us at 
    support@axsol.com.



Section 1.4
 
		   Screen Access Driver Support
    
    If you have already installed all the necessary files needed
for
    running your DECTalk USB as a USB device, you are ready to  
    configure your favorite windows screen reader to operate with
your new 
    DECTalk USB.

    Currently, the DECtalk USB may only be used as a DECtalk
    Express.  Access Solutions apologizes for this inconvenience 
    and assures the customer that USB driver support for some of your
    most popular screen readers will be released shortly.  In the
    mean time, you may use your DECtalk USB as a DECtalk Express as follows:
    
    Position the USB/RS232 mode switch towards the headphone  
    jack and or volume thumb wheel.  Next, select the "DECtalk Express"
    from your screen readers' synthesizer selection menu. 
    
    Note: In most cases you will need to select and configure the 
	  communication port the DECtalk USB is connected to. The 
	  communication port should be setup with the following
	  parameters:
    
    baud rate = 9600
    parity = none
    data bits = 8
    stop bits = 1
    flow control = Xon/Xoff



Section 1.5

			 Trouble Shooting

     If you are having trouble getting your DECTalk USB to
install or work properly, here are a few suggestions that may help.

     1. First review sections 1.1 through 1.3 of this user manual. 

     2. Make sure the thunb wheel  on the unit is turned about  
	       half way up. Turn the thumb wheel clockwise to
	       increase volume.

     3. If you are using a screen access software package, make
sure         volume levels are not set to low.

     4. Make sure all cables are attached correctly and their
respective  
	connectors are properly seated.

     If you are still having trouble and have followed the steps
shown above, it is recommended that you contact Access Solutions
technical support team for further assistance.  Refer to the
beginning of this user manual for contact information.            


	   
Section 1.6

			Advanced Features

     If you are a software developer you are in luck!  Access
Solutions offers a free developer kit that contains all the tools
needed for writing software to talk to the DECTalk USB.  We do
not include this information in this user manual because it is far
to boring and beyond the imagination of the average user.  If you
are interested in obtaining the
developer kit, feel free to contact Access Solutions' technical
support team for more information.



Section 1.7

			  Specifications

Power:

A.C Adaptor -    
  Input: 120vac 60Hz, 7.5W
  Output: 6.0Vdc 500ma
  UL: E175399, 3D81
  Manf: Xicon
  Part#: 106054

Max power consumption - P_max = 1.32W @5Vdc 
Max current consumption - I_max = 400ma @5Vdc

Continuous average supply current - I_avg = 141ma, not speaking,
using 6Vdc adapter.
Continuous average usb supply current - I_usb_avg = 137ma @5Vdc

Max input supply voltage - V_sup=9Vdc, typical 6Vdc from supplied
				       A.C. to D.C. adapter. 
Max USB input voltage - V_usb_max 5.5Vdc
Minimum USB supply voltage - V_usb_min 4.4Vdc 


Battery:

  Manf: Eveready
  Type - Alkaline
  Batery voltage - 9Vdc


Audio:

f_ch = 100Hz; @6db/octive
f_cl = 5.5Khz; @12db/octive
f_pb - 5.40Khz
SPL - 92db ~6" on axium, Rl=4 ohm
Pwrm_audio - Max audio output power - 625mW; @Vdd=3.3v, Rl=4 ohm  
    Headphone impedance - Zhd = ~75 ohms


Connectivity:

    RS232 Port  -  Data communication equipment (DCE device) 
    USB Port  -  Full speed USB (12Mbps)


Operating Temperature  -  0C - 70C
Dimensions - 5.5"x3.6"x1.1" 
Weight - ~8 Ounces without battery installed
 

Copyright (c) 2000-2004 by Axsol Inc.
Copyright (c) 2001-2004 by Fonix  Corporation.  
All rights reserved.

The Axsol logo and Access Solutions are trademarks of Axsol Inc.
The Fonix logo and DECtalk are trademarks of Fonix Corporation Inc.
The Motorola logo and DragonBall are trademarks of Motorola Inc.
