                          May 17, 1993

                The Braille 'N Speak Macro Editor

                      Version 1.00F (beta)

                         by Kris Whitney

The macro editor is a downloadable application for the BNS640
which can read, list, create, and edit macros in the BNS
macros.sys file.


When started the program will look for a file called macros.sys
unless a file name was given to the program as an arguement in
which case that file will be searched for.  If it finds that file
the macro definitions are read from it.  If the file is not found
it is created and initialized to an empty file.  If the program
can not find or create the file an error message is spoken and
the program terminates.  NOTE: a message indicating that the
macro file is being created will be spoken if the file could not
be found originally.

When the program starts it gives a brief sigh-on message followed
by the number of defined macros found.  After that you are
prompted for a command.  The commands accepted by the program are
one letter commands.  There is no need for a terminating e-chord
after a command given from this prompt.

                         Command Summary

A    The a command will tell you a little about the current
version of the software.

B    This option will give you a brief list of all of the macros
defined.  You will not get any definitions; you will just get a
list of the keys which have macros assigned to them.

C    The c command will cause the program to clear all
     definitions of all macros and reset the entire macro buffer
     to 0.  You will be prompted to confirm this action.

D    The d option will allow you to duplicate a macro definition. 
For example; if macro 'a' had some function which you wished
macro 'f' to also have with minor differences you may duplicate
macro 'a' to 'f' then edit the definition of 'f'.  When you
select the D option and the help level is novice you are asked if
you really want to do this.  If you say yes then the definition
will be copied.  If you are going to copy a macro over another
macro you will be prompted to see if that is what you really
want.

E    This command will erase an individual macro definition.  You
will be prompted for the key whos definition you wish deleted;
and if the help level is set to novice you will be prompted to
confirm before the definition is erased.

F    This command tells you the name of the current working macro
file.

g    This command allows you to get a new macro file from the BNS
or TNS.  If your changes have not been saved you will be prompted
to confirm as this file will overlay your existing file rather
than being merged with it.

H    This command sets the help level for the program.  If the
help level is set to novice then all prompts will be spoken.  If
the level is set to expert then very few prompts will be spoken. 
When you select this option you will be prompted to enter e for
expert mode or n for novice mode.  This setting will be
remembered between times the program is run; however, if you
reload the program from disk the help level will not be
remembered.  Inorder to have the setting you prefer saved so that
it will be in effect each time you load the program from disk or
your PC simply go in to the program, set the option to be the way
that you would like, and then save the program back to your disk
or PC.  Do not overwrite an existing copy of the program.  To
avoid problems rename the original file and just save the
modified one so that if there is ever a problem you can get it
back.

I    This command will allow you to import the definitions
contained in another macro file.  For example; let's say that you
have a friend with a BNS who has some really nice macros that you
want.  You take a copy of his macro file.  You must rename it to
something else so that it does not overwrite your current file. 
After you load it into your unit you run the macro editor.  At
the main command prompt you enter the letter i.  You will be
prompted to enter the name of a file to read from.  Enter the
name of the file that you just got from your friend.  You will
then be asked if you want any macros you have with the same key
to be overwrittten.  If you say yes then your friends macros will
overlay any of your which have the same key assigned to them.  If
you say  no then the program will ask you individually about each
one.

L    The l option will make an ascii list of all your macros. 
     After selecting l you will be prompted to enter the name of
     a file in which to save the definitions.  You may enter any
     legal BNS file name.  If the file does not exist it will
     created, and if it does exist you will find all of the
     original data that was in the file deleted and the file
     moved to the end of the file list.  The list of macros will
     then be appended.  The program will speak an error message
     if there is a problem otherwise you will here "ok" and you
     will be returned to the command prompt.

M    This option prompts you for a file name, and it makes a copy
of the macros.sys file in your bns and places it into the file
with the name you just gave.

P    The P option will print a list of the defined macros to the
serial port on the BNS.  You will be told to turn on device and
press a key to begin.  If you wish to stop the process at this
point you can abort with a z-chord.  The format of the output
will be the same as the L command's output to a text file.

Q    This option quits the program.  Any changes you have made to
     the macros will be saved to the macros.sys file.

S    This option is a cloan of the SH (dots 1 4 6) option; it
shows you the contents of a macro.

U    This command updates the current working version of the
macro file with your working definitions.

V    This is the view & edit selection; the heart of the program. 
     When you select this option you will be asked for the macro
     key to read. You may press any letter or symbol.  Pressing
     any chord will abort this function.  When you press the
     symbol it's current definition will be read or a message
     will be spoken indicating that the macro is undefined.  You
     will then be prompted to see if you wish to edit the current
     definition.  If you select yes you will be placed in to the
     macro editor function which will be discussed below.

W    This option allows you to change the name of the current
macro file.  When you do this the new file is written to with the
current definitions.

X    This option will exit the macro editor without saving.  If
you have modified the macros you will be prompted before you exit
the program.

NOTE: A z chord will act the same as the x command.

#    This option will announce the number of defined macros.

%    This option (dots 1 4 6) will show you a macro definition. 
You can select this option and you will be prompted to enter a
macro key.  The program will then either read the macro
definition or tell you that the macro is undefined whereupon you
will be returned to the command prompt.

On startup the program will set punctuation to most to allow all
characters to be read.  The program will reset the punctuation to
whatever state it was in when it exits; however, if you powerdown
the system while the program is still running you will find that
the punctuation state does not get set back.

                        Editting a Macro

When you have said yes to the "edit this macro" prompt you will
be placed in the macro editing function.  You should use the dots
3 & dots 6 chord to move backwards and forwards respectively
threw the macro.  Typeing and i chord will cause the system to
say "insert" and the next character typed will be placed just
before the character or chord the cursor is resting on.  If a
character or chord command is entered without an i chord first it
will be appended to the end of the macro definition.

Pressing a d chord will delete the character under the cursor. 
If this is done at the last character in the buffer the character
will move to be placed on the new last character.

 Pressing a } chord or a K chord will prompt you to remove the
entire definition for the current macro.  If you respond
positively to the prompt the macro buffer will be empty and you
may then continue editing.  A k chord will also perform this
function.

Pressing M chord will set a mark.  Pressing a dots 1 2 6 chord
will cut the text between the cursor and the mark to a cut
buffer.  Pressing a p chord will paste the cut buffer in to the
current macro.

Any normal letter or symbol will be added to the end of the
current definition.  Pressing a dots 1-6 chord will cause the
next character to be interpreted as a chord command.  You may
type it as a chord if you wish, but (dots 1-6 chord) t is
equivalent to (dots 1-6 chord) (t-chord); both will cause a t-
chord to be placed in to the text.  For the convenience of Type
'N Speak users you may use an H chord in place of the dots 1 6
chord.

When you are finished edittting, press an e-chord to terminate
the edit function.  Pressing z-chord will terminate without
saving any changes to the macro.

Pressing r chord will tell you how many more characters will fit
in the macro.

Pressing wh chord (dots 1 5 6) will tell where the cursor is in
the macro definition.
